The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

THE
ALMIGHTY
CHANCE

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

This page is intentionally left blank

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

World Scientific Lecture Notes in Physics, Vol. 20

THE
ALMIGHTY
CHANCE

Ya. B. Zeldovich
A. A. Ruzmaikin
D. D. Sokoloff

\t>

I

World Scientific
Singapore • New Jersey • London • Hong Kong

Published by

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd.
P O Box 128, Farrer Road, Singapore 9128
USA office: 687 Hartwell Street, Teaneck, NJ 07666
UK office: 73 Lynton Mead, Totteridge, London N20 8DH

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE
Copyright © 1990 by World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd.
All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof, may not be reproduced
in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photo­
copying, recording or any information storage and retrieval system now
known or to be invented, without written permission from the Publisher.

ISBN 9971-50-916-4
9971-50-917-2 (pbk)

Printed in Singapore by General Printing Services Pte. Ltd.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

PREFACE

This book, devoted to one of the directions of modern physics, namely,
the emergence of order from chaos, is among the last works of an
outstanding Soviet physicist, Yakov Borissovich Zeldovich. His interest
in these problems stems from his studies of the combustion theory, heat
transfer and magnetic-field generation in moving media, and the
structure of the universe — work that he carried out over a long period
from the thirties up to the eighties. The immediate basis of this book is
formed by his papers on the theory of random media, especially those
published in collaboration with S.A. Molchanov and the other two
authors of this book (Zeldovich et al., 1985, 1987a, b). These studies
apply rather complicated mathematics, although the basic results are of
quite general and simple nature. These studies led to a simple and brief
discussion of the abovementioned problems as well as transparent
connections between various phenomena.
Yakov Borissovich has applied all his enormous energy to persuade us
that this is the very approach that is needed. At the moment of his
untimely death, the text was at the final stage of preparation: the plans for
all the chapters were worked out and the draft of almost the entire text
had been prepared. We worked at several sections of the manuscript
simultaneously and revised it together to reach the final form. Quite
naturally, with this style of work, the book was not written consecutively
from the first to the last page. In his last weeks, Yakov Borissovich wrote
Chapter 3 and during his final days he was finishing Chapter 2. As usual,
he wrote on a simple schoolboy's notebook. The last pack of these
notebooks was given to us a few days before his death. We consider this
work as planned by him a tribute to his memory.
V

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

VI

PREFACE

Working on the text, we tried to put together the idea of a simple and
compact book as well as the more subtle ideas of Ya.B. Zeldovich. In the
text as it is, only in Chapter 9 did we demonstrate some of the technical
complexities that arise in the application of the theory to specific
problems. We hope that we will be able to fulfill our initial plan and to
devote more detailed discussions on special mathematical problems in
our next book (which will be written together with S.A. Molchanov, who
has made substantial contributions to the mathematical formalism of
intermittency theory).
We did not attempt to finish a small fragment at the end of Chapter 2
where Zeldovich exposed the mathematical formalism required for the
chapter on the structure of the universe. The beginning of this fragment
was written by him three days before his death and we just give his text
here:
8. The General Random Homogeneous Distribution of
Particles
In the preceding sections, we considered the random distribu­
tion of molecules that would arise when the Lord populates a
vessel with molecules in a purely random manner.
The Lord fully expresses his omnipotence by giving free
play to chance: any individual molecule is positioned at any
place with equal probability. To be more exact, the probability
of putting a molecule in the elementary volume dv is dv/ V,
where Fis the total volume of the vessel. The Almighty would
not miss and the total probability for a molecule to be put into
any part of the vessel is unity. Jdv/V = V/V = 1.
It would be a mistake to assert that exactly the same
statistical properties have a distribution that arose due to
this or that physical process even if it preserved homogeneity
of space, i.e., all spatial parts statistically have the same
properties.
the end for 30/XI. 1987,
but not the end (sic)
Everything said or made in the last hours of life inevitably acquires a
symbolic meaning even though it was an ordinary everyday event. The last

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

PREFACE

VII

notes of Zeldovich are remarkable for his appeal to the Almighty
supplemented at the margin by the proposition of discussing in the text
the concept of hypostasis. Nevertheless, we are not tempted to overesti­
mate this fact. As far as we know, Yakov Borissovich was not a religious
person and the best we can do is to refer to the French writer Marcel
Proust (Zeldovich always felt an intrinsic connection with French
literature whose translator into Russian was his mother, a member of the
Union of Soviet Writers) who wrote that the highest praise to God is the
unbelief of a scholar who is sure that the perfection of the World makes
existence of Gods unnecessary.
We consider the very last phrase more symbolic, "the end for 30/XI.87
but not the end". It is surprisingly close to the well-known Vortsetzung
folgt at the very end of the Wilhelm Meister dialogue by Goethe, also one
of the last writings of that great German writer.
The text was translated from Russian by Anvar Shukurov, also a pupil
of Ya.B. Zeldovich. His comments helped to improve this presentation
and his role goes beyond a translator's job.
We wish to express our deep gratitude to S.A. Molchanov, a co-author
of many original papers whose physical aspect is discussed in this book.
Several examples taken from the fields of science, in which the authors
are not specialists, have been proposed to us by V.V. Dvornichenko, V.L.
Egorov, M.S. Markov, D.D. Sokoloff, Jr., and Yu.V. Chernov. Special
thanks are due to M.I. Bujakaite for her help in the preparation of
the manuscript. The consideration of the VAAP representative, S.A.
Sergeeva, is also gratefully acknowledged.

A.A. Ruzmaikin
D.D. Sokoloff

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

This page is intentionally left blank

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

CONTENTS

Preface

V

Chapter 1. Introduction

1

Chapter 2.
2.1.
2.2.
2.3.
2.4.
2.5.
2.6.
2.7.
2.8.

The Chance on Stage
Classical Probability
Probability as a Measure
The Central Limit Theorem
The Least Squares Method
Random Functions, Fields, and Operators
Ergodic Properties, Chaos, Intermittency
Equilibrium and Transition Probability
Spatial Distribution of Particles in Gases

9
9
13
19
23
30
34
41
45

Chapter 3.
3.1.
3.2.
3.3.
3.4.
3.5.
3.6.
3.7.

Diffusion
The Diffusion Coefficient
Solutions of the Diffusion Equation
Diffusion in Infinite Space and Green's Function
Probabilistic Interpretation of Diffusion
Diffusion in External Force Field
Osmotic Pressure
On Reversibility of Diffusion in Time

49
49
55
60
61
65
71
78

Chapter 4.
4.1.
4.2.
4.3.
4.4.

The Brownian Motion
Einstein's Description of Brownian Motion
The Wiener Path
Averaging over Paths
The Wiener and Feynman Integrals

81
83
85
89
92

ix

X

CONTENTS

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

4.5. The White Noise
4.6. The Ornstein-Uhlenbeck Process
Chapter 5.
5.1.
5.2.
5.3.
5.4.
5.5.
5.6.
5.7.
5.8.
5.9.

Fractals and Dimensions
Historical Perspective
Fractals: Thick Lines
Fractals: Thick Surfaces
Fractals: A Foamy Space-Time
Fractals: Contour Lines
Fractals: Dense Point Set
Fractals and Self-Similarity
Strange Attractors
Measuring the Attractor Dimension

Chapter 6.
6.1.
6.2.
6.3.

Percolation and Random Boundaries
Clusters and Percolation
Intermittency and Percolation
Eigen-Oscillations of a Region with Random
Boundary
6.4. The Zeros of Eigenfunctions of Free and Forced
Oscillations
6.5. The Mathematical Language of the Percolation
Theory

99
101
103
103
109
117
119
121
122
124
126
131
139
139
146
151
155
159

Chapter 7. Random Hydrodynamic Motions
7.1. The Turbulent Flow whose Velocity is Laminar
7.2. The Role of Chance in Transition to Turbulence
7.3. The Developed Turbulence
7.4. Internal Structure and Fractal Properties
of Developed Turbulence
7.5. Temperature Spots in Random Flow

165
165
168
171

Chapter 8.
8.1.
8.2.
8.3.
8.4.
8.5.
8.6.

185
185
188
190
195
198

General Conception of Intermittency
Intermittency of a Random Quantity
Evolution of a Random Quantity
A Random Medium
The Short-Correlated Random Medium
Intermittency in Non-Stationary Medium
Structure of the Moments of a Scalar
Field in Random Medium

174
176

201

CONTENTS

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

8.7. Vorticity and Deformations in a Flow of
Incompressible Fluid
8.8. Vortex Filaments in Hydrodynamics
8.9. Intermittency in Nonlinear Media
8.10. Propagation of Field Fronts in Random Media
8.11. The Intermittent World
Chapter 9.
9.1.
9.2.
9.3.
9.4.
9.5.
9.6.
9.7.
9.8.
9.9.
9.10.

Magnetic Field in a Flow of Conductive Fluid
The Kinematic Dynamo Problem
The Short-Correlated Random Flow
Generation of the Mean Magnetic Field
Fluctuations of Helicity
Higher Statistical Moments and Intermittency
in the Fast Dynamo
Structure of the Magnetic Field
The Typical Structure of Magnetic Field
Self-Excitation of Magnetic Fields in Finite Bodies
Magnetic Field Intermittency with Account of the
Lorentz Force
The Dynamo Theorem

XI

209
213
215
221
225
237
237
243
245
249
252
256
267
273
276
281

Chapter 10 . The Casual Universe
10.1. The Universe
10.2. Conservation of Charges
10.3. Conservation of Energy
10.4. The Astrophysical Consequences. Is the
Pulsating Universe Inevitable?
10.5. The Spontaneous Formation

295
298

Epilogue.

303

References

The Birth of "Divinamics"

287
287
289
293

305

CHAPTER

ONE

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

INTRODUCTION

The problems of physics of random media are always a source of novel
ideas. This field of science is associated in a versatile way with real
complexity of random media (as an ensemble of enormous numbers of
molecules that form macroscopic bodies, or a plentitude of disordered
motions typical of turbulence, etc.). Following the well-known aphorism
of David Hilbert, we may only wonder how physicists can deal with a
random medium though the subject may be too complicated for them.
The simplest fruitful approach consists in the derivation and solution of
equations for macroscopic bodies or averaged quantities, e.g., tempera­
ture which is essentially the averaged kinetic energy of molecular motion.
A problem once proposed by VAcademie Francaise which considered
heat propagation in solids for given boundary conditions has become a
basis of classical mathematical physics. J.B. Fourier solved this problem
in 1807 and 1811 by separation of variables. This solution brought about
such important concepts as the Fourier series and integral, eigenvalues,
and eigenfunctions. Later, methods of solution of other equations of
mathematical physics were formulated, in particular equations of elastic
oscillations and the Maxwell and Schrodinger equations.
Solving the heat conduction equation by following the approach of
Fourier, one does not need any knowledge of the kinetic theory of heat.
Temperature or, say, the concentration of diffusing admixture, can be
considered as a continuous and smooth function of position and time.
And still later on, in the early twentieth century, the possibility of solving
statistical problems by means of differential equations and regular
functions was considered a great development. The statistical mechanics
of L. Boltzmann and J.W. Gibbs has allowed us to determine properties
1

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

2

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

of equilibrium states, e.g., molecular distribution in a given potential
force field. A. Einstein established the connection between the mean
mobility of particles in the force field and their diffusion driven by the
concentration gradient. This removed a mystical veil from the pheno­
menon of osmotic pressure which is so important for biological cells and
life itself. L. Boltzmann, M. Planck, A. Fokker, P. Langevin, D. Hilbert
and, more recently, N.N. Bogolyubov have developed the kinetic theory.
In the heat conduction problem the very nature of solution makes the
approach of Fourier favourable. Higher modes rapidly decay and thereby
a basic distribution of temperature is quickly established, practically
independently of the initial distribution. The same result can be obtained
with the help of Green's function,
&(t, x, y) = (27Hrt)

exp

[=&]■

which is especially convenient in unbounded domains. Here x and y are
two spatial points, and K is thermometric conductivity. The convolution
of the initial distribution with this function smooths out and supresses
singularities.8
However, there is an effect that introduces greater complexity into the
process of heat conduction or diffusion. This is the motions in a medium
where diffusion occurs. In a typical case the motion is turbulent and can
be determined only statistically. As it was first shown by J. Taylor (1921),
in the case of evolution of large-scale averaged quantities, e.g., the mean
temperature, it can again be described by classical equations of mathe­
matical physics with effective transfer coefficients (the turbulent diffusivity). But in the case of enhanced temperature spots (this was initially
noticed by Gibbs, who considered the evolution of a drop of ink in water,
and substantiated by D. Townsend and D. Batchelor (1950)), turbulence
* This property is far from trivial. Note that in the theory of oscillations, an initial singular
state (delta-function) preserves its spectrum throughout the evolution provided the
medium is ideal (without dissipation). In the corresponding generic boundary-value
problem, the modes cease to be phased and what arises is the unsmooth, fractal spatial
distribution of density and pressure. The Green's function of the wave propagation
equation is also singular.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

INTRODUCTION

3

can make sharper gradients without increasing the maximal temperature.
In other words, turbulence feeds higher Fourier modes and irregularities
of an embedded scalar field. The rate of change of the integrals of the type
$Tld\,
that determines the rate of establishment of equilibrium
distribution, is proportional to -Kf(VT)2d3x (Zeldovich, 1937; Obukhov, 1949). In problems with heat sources the stationary heat flux is also
expressed through the latter integral.
One more complication is revealed in the case of an embedded vector
field. For instance, the evolution of the (vectorial) magnetic field
embedded in a moving conducting fluid plays a decisive role in the
problem of the origin of magnetism of the Earth, the Sun and many other
cosmic objects. In the limit of high electric conductivity the field is frozen
into the fluid, as H. Alfven and K.O. Kippenheuer put it. It moves
together with the fluid particles (the field vector which connects two
infinitesimally close particles varies proportionally with the distance
between these particles). Owing to this specific property, a suitable
motion of the medium does not only transfer the field, in contrast to the
scalar case, but also provides continuous and prolonged growth of the
magnetic fieldb which can be stopped only by back-action of the field on
the motion, i.e., a nonlinear effect.
Nonlinear problems of heat conduction and vector field generation
have a common characteristic feature: the formation of dissipative
structures, i.e., compact regions of enhanced intensity. The relevant
theory, pioneered by I. Prigogine and impressively popularized by
H. Haken, was actively developed by many groups of scientists. Here are
some fields where this theory has been succesfully applied: (a) biology —
the formation of the structure of a living organism to propagate new
species in the biosphere; (b) combustion — heat localization in nonlinear
media, explosions, formation of blast waves and their (in)stability and
structure; (c) evolution of the structure of the universe — formation of
galaxies and their clusters from nearly uniform plasma whose existence at
early stages of evolution can be considered as firmly established.
b

Note that vorticity obeys the same equation as the magneticfield.However, an important
distinction is that magnetic field can be considered embedded in an arbitrary velocity
field while a given vorticity distribution completely determines the corresponding
velocity field.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

4

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

Let us discuss the latter problem in more detail. Fragmentation of
nearly uniformly distributed matter into more or less isolated galaxies
(conglomerates of stars) and galaxy clusters proceeds under the action of
gravity. (The assertion that thermodynamic equilibrium corresponds to
spatially uniform density and temperature — the "thermal death" — is
true only in everyday or laboratory physico-chemical situations but not
in the presence of long-range gravitational forces.) There are reasons to
believe that in the initial distribution of matter short waves are
suppressed by dissipative processes. Unstable growth of longer waves
leads to the intersection of particle trajectories, i.e., to the formation of
caustics similar to optical ones (Zeldovich, 1970; Shandarin and Zeldovich, 1984; Arnold, 1980). The result is the formation of surfaces where
the density p is formally infinite. The mean squared density, (p2), is
divergent; meanwhile, obviously, p can never be negative. Therefore, the
distribution of deviations of the density from the mean value essentially
differs from the Gaussian one: there are singularities, i.e., p-- +oo, but
nowhere is p < 0. This peculiarity is closely associated with the fact that
in Fourier expansions of singularities (caustics) short-wavelength and
high-frequency harmonics have large amplitudes, whereas in the initial
spectrum the amplitudes of higher harmonics are zero or decay exponen­
tially. The formation of singularities leads to a power-law decrease of the
amplitudes with frequency. A detailed analysis of Shandarin and
Zeldovich (1984) shows that the resulting structure has the form of a
network from two-dimensional view and a cellular structure with thin
dense walls in three-dimensional space.
However, the formation of intensity peaks or structures are possible
even at the linear stages of evolution when the coefficients of the
governing linear equation (5) are determined by properties of the
background random medium. It is essential that the solution depends on
these random coefficients in a nonlinear fashion. For instance, the
density distribution p(x) = exp [— /ty(x)], with 0 = const., is evidently
non-Gaussian when the force potential <p is a Gaussian random variable.
This distribution cannot be satisfactorily characterized only by the first
two statistical moments, the mean value (p) and the mean square (p2).
Moreover, for this distribution the ratios of subsequent moments,
{p4)/(P2)2> (P6)/(P2Y> etc-> exponentially grow with the moment order.
This implies that the spatial distribution is highly non-uniform, the

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

INTRODUCTION

5

regions of evenly distributed density coexisting with sharp density
concentrations.
The question of topological structure of an intermittent distribution is
non-trivial because the peaks either form isolated individual "islands" or
may be connected into "mountain chains". A standard correlation
analysis is ineffective in distinguishing between these two cases. To do
this one needs a more delicate method whose possibilities are closer to
those of the facility most advanced in pattern recognition, the human
ego. The next step in this direction are percolation methods: connection
or isolation of given regions that can be determined through investiga­
tion of the possibility to travel infinitely along these regions, e.g., with
enhanced density.
When the agents that damp higher harmonics are absent (usually when
viscosity or molecular diffusivity are neglected), objects with fractal
dimension can exist. Variations of a scalar field with time and position
and level surface (line) of a scalar field defined in a volume (on a surface)
can have different fractal properties (Zeldovich and Sokoloff, 1985).
More versatile features are introduced by vector fields. Curl-free
vector fields are essentially gradients of scalar fields. Therefore, more
interesting are solenoidal vector fields, velocity field of incompressible
fluid for which V-v = 0, and magnetic field among them. In this case, intermittency appears in the form of thin ropes or layers within which the
vector field is concentrated. Every rope can be characterized by the flux
of the vector across its section. The flux is conserved during motion and
stretching of the rope. Toward the end of the rope, where the crosssection varies, even the viscosity does not change the integral flux. A
certain fraction of ropes are closed on themselves. The problems of
linkages of these ropes and the fraction of the ropes that extend to infinity
are also of interest.
Conceptions of intermittency of solutions to linear stochastic differen­
tial equations are quite similar to localization as described by solutions of
the Schrodinger equation in quantum theory of solids, as introduced and
considered by Anderson and Mott (see, e.g., Lifshitz, Gradeskul and
Pastur, 1982). This effect was first noticed in the "tight binding model"
of Anderson with the lattice Hamiltonian H = — A + a2 U(\), where a is
the coupling constant and U(x) is the random stationary potential
consisting of a sequence of independent identically distributed random

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

6

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

quantities. This operator has a point spectrum0 and corresponding
eigenfunctions fall off exponentially (which means localization) in three
dimensions only when a is sufficiently large and for any a in one and two
dimensions. This situation is drastically different from the case of
deterministic potentials, typical of ordinary quantum mechanics, where
only discrete of continuous spectra are possible. One striking conse­
quence of this theory is a conclusion that, in a one-dimensional medium
with even weak disorder, such a transfer process as electric conductivity
in weak electric field becomes impossible. These results imply that nonstationary fluctuations in distribution of impurities can play a more
important role in conduction mechanisms of real conductors than
asserted earlier.
The concept of intermittency was developed independently and even
earlier in the theory of hydrodynamic turbulence. Immediately after the
formulation of the well-known theory of A.N. Kolmogorov and A.S.
Obukhov, it was noted by L.D. Landau that the spectral energy transfer
rate e cannot be constant, and the fluctuations of e should be important at
small scales. Analysis of this possibility has led to a more exact
formulation of fundamentals of the theory (see Monin and Yaglom,
1973). It was also found that the distribution of e at small scales is
intermittent (close to the log-normal one); more recent discussion is
given by V. Frisch (1985). Moreover, intermittency was also noted in
connection with wave propagation in turbulent media (Rytov et al.,
1978).
Problems of this type widely use the calculus of path integration.
It is appropriate to compare this approach with classical methods of
mathematical physics discussed above. Our predecessors were pleased
and reassured by the opportunity of considering a single differential
equation instead of an enormous number of irregular trajectories of
individual molecules. "One cannot follow all 6 X 1023 molecules in these
20 or more litres of hydrogen." Nowadays we know that in many actual
cases, solution of equations for thousands or tens of thousands of "large
c

We recall that the spectrum is called continuous when every point from some energy
interval corresponds to an admissible energy of the system; for discrete spectra there is a
finite number of energy levels; for point spectra the number of levels over a finite energy
interval is infinite but countable (as, e.g., the set of rational numbers).

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

INTRODUCTION

7

particles" becomes accessible with the development of modern com­
puters. In addition, we see again, at a higher level, the relevance of an in­
numerable number of random paths in grasping such random-related
effects as intermittency.
Our discussion of modern problems of the order in random media is
based on some classical results of probability theory and statistical
physics which are considered in the first chapters. For physicists,
randomness is often associated with quantum mechanics, zero vacuum
fluctuations or the uncertainly principle. We should stress the differences
of our treatment with these cases. The basic equations of quantum
mechanics — the Schrodinger, Dirac, and Klein-Gordon equations —
are not random equations. Being formulated in appropriate forms,
mechanics is quite a deterministic science. Randomness appears only
when we endow the wave function with a perspicuous meaning,
interpreting it as a probability amplitude for a particle to reside at a given
position.
In a complicated picture of interaction between chaos and order, we
keep mainly to a new aspect — generation of order by chaos. Another
aspect, the onset of chaos from order, has been analyzed for a sufficiently
long time and good accounts of it can be found in many books. In
particular, the reader is referred to a recent book by Milloni et al. (1987).
Thus, we shall spend much time discussing intermittency which is
characterized by higher moments of the distribution function. Following
the discussion above, intermittency is a son of chance. Nevertheless, in
many cases, this offspring has its own importance. Intermittency brings
about the problem of geometrical structure of singularities in the random
field distribution. Intermittency implies that these regions with excep­
tionally high values of a vector or scalar make decisive contribution to
integral properties even though they occupy a small fraction of a surface
or volume.
We clearly realize that our subject is far from being a set of settled
problems. Thus, we intentionally make the discussion as qualitative in
character as possible in order to make it accessible to a wider audience.

CHAPTER

TWO

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

THE CHANCE ON STAGE

2.1. CLASSICAL PROBABILITY
All of us are familiar with a common-sense notion of probability.
Planning a visit to a physician, a suspicious patient estimates the
probability of him having AIDS as, say, 10 percent, which is the average
value for the whole population. This can hardly be considered an
educated estimate. At best, it estimates the degree of his ignorance or selfdelusion. The point is that the 10 percent refers to the average value
while every person is interested in the estimate of his personal risk. The
latter estimate strongly depends on one's particular way of life, habits,
etc. The first scientific concepts of probability were formed with the
participation of persons quite reputable, but not very respectable from
the modern point of view — gamblers and dicers. Blaise Pascal put an
end to the doubts of Chevalier de Mere by proving that two slightly
different variants of playing three dice (with the results of eleven or
twelve pips) have actually considerably different probabilities. Pascal's
idea is utmostly simple in the case of two dice: 11 pips can be realized in
two independent cases, 5 + 6 and 6 + 5, while 12 pips require the
unique combination 6 + 6. Therefore the probability of having 11 pips is
twice that of having 12 pips.
The role of gambling and dicing as a convenient model and basis for
the development of the probability concept is indisputable. However,
gambling games were not the single source of interest in probability.
Trade or insurance can be mentioned, among other fields. This fact is
stressed by many historian-scientists, especially by Maistrov (1980).
From time immemorial, people pondered about the role of chance in
their lives. Following the dissertation of Marx, in this connection
9

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

10

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

philosophers stress the role of Epicurus. It is known that Roman lawyers
discussed the average life expectancy of man while Galileo approached
the problem of processing experimental data.
Two types of predecessors of the probability theory can be distin­
guished. The first line of thought discusses general questions, perfecting
the conceptual basis before trying to solve any specific problems. It was
probably W. von Humboldt (1905) who noted the necessity of this stage
of development of science. In this sense, the development of the doctrine
of the unity of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit
prepared the basis for anticipation of the wave-corpuscular dualism in
quantum mechanics. We are more interested in another aspect of the
problem: namely, derivation of the first concrete examples. Un­
doubtedly, de Mere's paradox takes a distinguished place among them.
Nowadays gambling is considered an occupation of minor importance,
sometimes even with criminal flavour. For the contemporaries of Pascal,
it was an important source of initial capital, or the last hope to mend
one's finances (cf. Weselovsky, 1909). Genetics, kinetic theory of gases,
statistical physics, applied statistics and sociology, and experimental
physics became consumers of concrete results of the probability theory
much later.
As it often happens, achievements have induced dizziness with
success. Along with the healthy development of the probability theory
and its applications, many pathological by-products appeared and are
still appearing that make popular the joke about three kinds of lie that
exist — a common lie, a wicked lie, and statistics. For instance,
probability theory was used in an attempt to prove that the Roman
Empire never existed (Postnikov and Fomenko, 1980). This was done in
the following way. Records of consecutive lengths of reigns of emperors
were considered for early and late periods separately and too many
coincidences were revealed in these two sequences of numbers. The
probability of such coincidence can be shown to be very low. This
fact was used to postulate that the historical records were falsified, being
a multiple repetition of some shorter records. Combination of a few such
excercises opens a possibility to conclude that all Ancient and Medieval
history was written in the era of Renaissance. A professional historian,
even though he is not a specialist in statistics, notes (Golubtsova and
Smirin, 1982) that succession to the throne of the Roman Empire was by

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

THE CHANCE ON STAGE

11

no means as regular as, say, the election of new presidents in the United
States. Towards the end of the Roman Empire, it was rather a result of
complicated interrelations of co-rulers, regional rulers, rebellious
colonels, etc. It is not a simple job to determine when one's reign ended
and the next began. The imaginary exactness may prove to be an
unconscious adjustment to a desired result.
This book is devoted to the role of chance-probability in natural
science. Even if we are willing to avoid falling into confusions like what is
mentioned above, it is worthwhile recalling the background of the
concept of probability.
In gambling games, the probability of winning is understood as a ratio
of the number of favourable combinations of cards (or dice positions) to
the total number of combinations:

This classical concept of probability can be used in other cases when one
deals with a finite number of possibilities, all of which are similar in
certain sense, i.e., requiring equivalent circumstances which are
equiprobable. This concept serves as the basis of the classical probability
theory which requires only correct calculation of the numbers n and N,
i.e., the ability to count all the possibilities correctly. Remarkably
enough, this not very demanding field of thought has obtained numerous
non-trivial results.
For example, one's intuition suggests that when two players toss a coin
N times, the number of cases when neither player is winning is
proportional to N. Actually, it can be shown that the number of draws,
i.e., changes of a leader, increases by a random-walk law — it is
proportional to N1'2 rather than to TV (see the textbook on the probability
theory by Feller, 1966). After N tosses of a dime, one can either win or
lose from 0 to 0.1 N,/2 dollars with noticeable probability. Almost always
one of the players wins, the draw is only one event from NU2 ones!
Therefore, the probability of a draw after N tosses is ~N _1/2 . The relative
number of the draws, NU1/N~N~U1, declines with N. This can be
considered a mathematical proof of the folk-wisdom saying: "Go ahead

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

12

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

and play, but do not play to recoup your losses once you fall behind".
Even basic results of the theory are far from widely known. Many "redand-black" players are still sure that after consequent occurrences of the
red field, there is a rather large probability that the next occurrence will
be black. This is a delusion: the probability depends only on the
mechanism of choosing the winning colour and, after the exclusion of
technical imperfections of the Klondike casino described by Jack
London, is always equal to 1/2.
We could easily increase the number of examples where the classical
notion of probability is applicable, but they turn out to be far from being
of interest to modern physics. One of the reasons of this irrelevance is
obvious — the finite value of N in classical theory. This is an obstacle,
e.g., in the formulation of the theory of experimental data processing
where the values errors can acquire belong to a continuous manifold.
Another fundamental restriction is more hidden, behind a modest
assumption of equal probability. Which events are actually equally
probable? In order to appreciate this problem, we have to consider the
probability that all four cards given out from a 52-card pack are aces. The
solution is as follows. The total number of equally probable events, i.e.,
different combinations of four cards, is equal to the number of
combinations of 52 elements four at a time, i.e., C*2 = 52!/(4!48!).
There is only one favourable outcome — an honest dealer has only four
aces in a pack. Thereby, the desired probability is

P =

1

«3.5X1(T6.

(2)

Now replace the cards by quantum particles that are identical fermions
and the combination of four aces is then replaced by the state in which all
fermions are in an identical quantum state. Then the Pauli principle
dictates that such an event is never possible. Its probability is exactly
zero! This simple problem underlines a deep connection between spin
and statistics. Probabilities of combinations of boson "cards" must be
calculated in their specific way.
Niels Bohr once said that a specialist is a person who is aware of the
typical traps and mistakes in his field of knowledge. One of the most

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

THE CHANCE ON STAGE

13

widespread mistakes in probability theory is the unjustified assumption
of equal probability and independence of events. Another typical mistake
is the erroneous application of the probabilistic approach a posteriori.
For instance, if you are informed that your friend has bought ten lottery
tickets and one of them won, please think twice before saying that the
probability of payoff in that lottery was about 10%.
Of course, every concrete branch of science that employs the idea of
probability can make a discourse upon the notion of probability. This is
exemplified by quantum mechanics where the probability amplitude is
described by the Schrodinger equation. When this equation is solved,
only rudimentary information on probability is needed, and these facts
can be easily packed into a few pages of a quantum mechanics textbook.
In this very sense, L.D. Landau once said that a physicist does not need
special studies of the probability theory. However, the modern science of
probability begins where, as a rule, the concept of equal probability
cannot be easily applied, and probability distribution cannot be easily
obtained by solving certain equations like the Schrodinger equation (for
examples see especially Chapter 8).
2.2. PROBABILITY AS A MEASURE
Modern understanding of probability stems from a rather radical idea:
consider probability as a measure in the space of elementary events
rather than dwell further on the concept of equal probabilities" to make it
more precise. Even recently this proposition would be understandable
only to the high-brow mathematicians. In fact, however, it is a simple and
adequate formalization of the concepts routinely used in applications for
a long time.
Let us begin with a specific example. Studies of magnetization of rocks
have established that the dipole magnetic field of the Earth changes its
polarity in random epochs /, t2, /3, . . . (Cox, 1968). It seems justified to
say that t is a realization of a random variable tj(co), where co enumerates
realizations. From the physical point of view, the reversals are the
consequences of some processes that occur within the Earth and which

* This idea was proposed by Borel (1909) and realized by Kolmogorov (1936).

14

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

are not adequately known (otherwise the values of (,- would be exactly
predictable!). Therefore, it is reasonable to consider that cofillsa certain
space Q.
Dividing the time axis into equal intervals of length At, we can
calculate the probability P(k) that the observed number of reversals k
occurs over the period At. The number k is also a realization of some ran­
dom variable which is a function of co. It is natural to assume that every
reversal occurs independently from the previous one and the probability
of reversal in period At is proportional to At. Then

P(0) = e-*«\ P{\) = -e-"'\...,
x

(

P(k) =

-^-e-*"\

k\

where x is the average period of constant polarity. This is the Poisson
distribution.
Now we can formulate the relevant concepts in general.
Thus, it is considered that there is a certain space of elementary events
£2 whose elements are co; sets in this space are events. Then the
probability of these events is equal to the area or volume occupied by the
corresponding set, or, as mathematicians put it, the measure related to
the measure of the whole space Cl. As a rule, the unit of area is
conveniently chosen such that the measure of the whole £1 is unity.
Even in simplest cases, e.g., in the analysis of experimental errors, we
do not know the structure of the space of elementary events, i.e., in fact
all the random effects that cause experimental errors. The more so, it is
difficult to determine probability over this space.
Nevertheless, it was this concept of probability which turned out to be
productive. It proved to be capable of adapting earlier results and of
giving new results essential for physics. The reason for this is the fact that
over the space of elementary events we can construct certain functions
whose properties are practically independent of the structure of this
space and the detailed definition of probability. These very properties,
with many of which physics is concerned, are the object of the probability
theory.
The function £(co) defined on the probability space is known as a
random quantity. Even a function that, say, is equal to seven over the

THE CHANCE ON STAGE

15

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

whole probability space is a trivial example of a random quantity. In this
sense deterministic quantities are limiting cases of random ones. The
value of £, for fixed co is called the realization of the random quantity. In
every experiment we observe such realizations.
Random quantity is characterized by features that only depend weakly
on the unknown properties of the probability space. It is most important
that the distribution function F((x), i.e., the probability that the random
quantity £ takes the values below x:
F<(X) =

P{Z<X).

If the distribution function is continuous (which is often the case), the
variable £ is called continuous and F(x) = fx-xp(x)dx, where p(x) is the
probability density. Its physical importance is due to the fact that p(x)dx
is the probability of £, having the value between x and x + dx (the share of
the interval dx in the total probability). For non-continuous random
variables, the probability density can be considered as a generalized
function. We mention that for the Gaussian probability density F(x) is
called the error function erf (x) and is tabulated in every reference book
on experimental data processing.
Distribution function and probability density are much more tangible
than the measure in the probability space. The cost for this tangibility is
the incomplete characterization of a random quantity by the probability
density. In particular, the same distribution function can characterize
entirely different random quantities, e.g., temperature fluctuations and
deviations of people's heights from the average value. Such quantities are
called identically distributed independent random variables. Formally,
independence implies that the probability of £, having the value between
x and x + dx and simultaneously £2 being between y and y + dy, which is
denoted by pl2(x,y)dxdy and called the joint probability density, has the
property
Pu(x,y) = P,(x)p2(y).
In other words, probability densities of independent random variables

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

16

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

are multiplicative: if you win in tossing a coin with the probability 1/2
and the coin has no memory, the probability of a double payoff is
1/2-1/2 = 1/4.
The probability density is still an excessively detailed characteristic of
random quantity. Of course, it can be at least crudely estimated
experimentally, but a more realistic goal is to measure the averaged value
of random quantity or its moments.
Obviously, f^.xp(x)dx = 1; that is, any random variable; with unit
probability surely acquires some value. The integral can have any value
and even diverge. This integral is called the mathematical expectation, or
the mean value of the quantity £, and is denoted as M£, or (£), or £. The
physical meaning of the mathematical expectation is described by its
jocular description as "an integral of the product of low probabilities by
nasty consequences". Returning to thoughts of a physician's patient we
note that catarrh is not considered a serious disease although the
probability of catching a cold during a year is close to unity; meanwhile,
AIDS is considered the "plague of the twentieth century" even though
the probability of infection is usually comparatively low — what matters
is the value of the "consequences" multiplier.
One can proceed to analyze not only the average but also its powers or
other functions. For instance, (/(£)) = S™aof(x)p(x)dx. In particular,
(£2) — (£)2 = D^= a[ is called the variance of the random variable £, while
a{ is known as the standard deviation. Those values of <J that frequently
occur concentrate near the mean value £; the variance, or the standard
deviation, characterizes the size of the concentration region. The
following useful relation can be easily verified:

((£-(£»2>=<0-<£>2 = ^ Considering physical examples, one may encounter random quantities
that do not possess mean values because the corresponding integrals
diverge. The first example of such a variable was given by Cauchy.
Consider a light beam coming from a point at unit distance from a
screen. The angle between the beam and the normal to the screen is <p.
Consider the situation when (p is randomly distributed over the interval
— TT/2^ 9>s 7r/2, i.e., the probability density is given by p0((p) = n~x.

THE CHANCE ON STAGE

17

The coordinate of the point where the beam reaches the screen, x = tan <p,
is a random quantity whose probability density decreases so slowly that it
has no mean value. Indeed, note that dcp = (1 + ^Y^dx and transform
the variable from <p to x in dP = p0d<p. This leads to the following
probability density for the coordinate x:

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

1 1
P(x) = n 1 + x2

•oc < X < oo .

We see that J™xp(x)dx = 1. However, (x) = i1xxp(x)dx diverges (the
main value is, of course, zero) and (JC2) = f™xx2p(x)dx = oo.
However, much more often, one encounters random quantities which
have a sufficiently rich set of averaged characteristics, e.g., all power
moments (£"). The theory of experimental data processing is based on the
presumption that experimental errors belong to this class of random
quantities.
The mean value of a random quantity usually can be measured
experimentally. In order to develop methods of such estimation, the
integral f*mxp(x)dx must be considered as an integral in the sense of
Lebesgue. In the usual integral calculus, an integral Jf(x)dx is introduced
as an area under the curve/(x) (Fig. 2.1). Lebesgue proposed to calculate
this area in another way by dividing the ordinate axis rather than the
/

Fig. 2.1. The Riemann integral is understood as the limit of the area shaded in this figure.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

18

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

abscissa (Fig. 2.2). It would seem that the difference is not critical but
now the nature of the variable x becomes unessential, and the only
property required is the possibility of introduction of the length along the
abscissa — more generally, the measure.
Now, understanding Sxp(x)dx, in the sense of Lebesgue, we can say
that (£) is a sum (integral) of the products of £, by the probability of £ to
have a given value, i.e., (£) is an integral of £ over the space of elementary
events: S£dco = (£). Here, dco is the measure, i.e., the probability in the
space of elementary events. From this point of view, the distribution
function provides a way to determine a new measure (length) along the
axis corresponding to a random quantity. With this new measure, the
length of a line segment between the points a and b is given by F(b) —
F(a). The average value is now (£) = JxdFi, where dF^ is determined by
the measure associated with the distribution function F(.

Fig. 2.2. The Lebesgue integral is based on the other (not the Riemann one) construction of
the shaded area.

Let us call an independent measurement a new random quantity that is
independent of a given random quantity £ and has the same probability
distribution. Now consider the space of elementary events as a unit
segment and assume that £ continuously varies with a), a point belonging
to this segment. Divide the segment into N parts and suppose that for
every new measurement the value of <o is taken from a new subsegment.

THE CHANCE ON STAGE

19

Then

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

Here 1 /./V is the measure (probability) of u> belonging to one of the
subsegments. Thus,

where £„ are the results of mutually independent measurements. The
larger N is, the more accurate is the expression (4). Of course, this
derivation is far from rigorous since we presume a specific structure for
the space of elementary events, but a more accurate analysis leads to the
same result.
Formula (4) is used so frequently that it is often considered a definition
of the mathematical expectation. Actually, this understanding is not
rigorous and in many branches of physics one encounters intermittent
random variables (see Chapter 8), for which the value of N ~lI,£n(a)n)
(often called the empirical average) considerably differs from the true
mean value (£) even for very large N.
Expression (4) can also be understood in another way, invoking the
notion of an ensemble of realizations of the random quantity £, rather
than a sequence of independent measurements. Thus the average value
can be understood as the average over the ensemble of realizations.
Expressions (3) and (4) present the essence of the so-called law of large
numbers. The ideas associated with this law can be developed on the
basis of the central limit theorem which is a foundation of application of
the probability theory in physics.

2.3. THE CENTRAL LIMIT THEOREM
The essence of this theorem is in the statement that, in the limit of large
number of summands, not only the equality (4) is true but, in addition,

20

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

the very sum has the standard (Gaussian) probability distribution which
is practically independent of detailed properties of £ What matters are
the mean value and variance of £
In order to derive the Gaussian distribution, let us find a relation
between the probability density of the sum with that of the summands.
Let C = £ + & • For the sum of two independent variables we have

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

Fc(x) = />{£<*}=/>{£+ £,<*}

= J pc(x')dx'

= \jp(xi)p(x2)dxldx2.

(5)

—00

The integral is taken over the domain xt + x2 < x. Transformation of
variables x = x{ + x2, x = x2 leads to
x

\\p{xx)p{x2)dx\dx2=

00

I dx \ p(x — x)dx.
-00

(6)

— 00

Now comparison of (5) and (6) yields
a

Pi(x) =

\

P(y)P(x - y)dy.

Thus, the probability density of a sum of independent random quantities
is given by a convolution of the probability densities of the summands.
This is also true for a sum of a large number of random quantities.
A convenient property of convolution is that its Fourier transform is
equal to the product of Fourier transforms of individual variables:
PN(k) = pN(k),

(7)

where N is the number of variables and the wave marks Fourier
transforms.

21

THE CHANCE ON STAGE

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

The Fourier transform of the probability density, i.e., Ip(x)
exp(ikx)dx can be considered the mean value of exp (ikx). This mean
value is known as the characteristic function of the random variable £
Qualitative properties of the characteristic function of an individual
summand, p(k), can be easily understood. Indeed, p(0) is obviously
unity. Since the probability density is non-negative, \p(k)\ < 1 for k =£ 0.
Let us evaluate the derivatives at k = 0:

P'(0) = IT \e'kxp{x)dx
dkj
p"(0)= - ( O ,

k_o

=

J

\ixe'kxp(x)dx

etc.

Thus,

p(k)= \ + ik(t)-l-(e)k2

+ ...

Now, we are ready to evaluate the characteristic function of the sum.
Obviously, pN(k) -+0forN-*co and k ^ 0, since this is the product of A7
numbers all of which are smaller than unity. Meanwhile, pN = 1 for
k = 0, i.e., the result is Dirac's delta-function. Its Fourier back-transfor­
mation is a uniform distribution. This reflects a widely known fact that
any random quantity £„ should be normalized by Arl/2.b
For the sake of simplicity put (£) = 0. Non-vanishing average values
can be easily accounted for because averages are additive (since the
integral is additive).
Dividing every summand by A7"2 we see that dispersions of the
summandsareoforderA 7 "', (<J3) ~ A7"372, etc. Therefore, the characteris­
tic function of an individual summand can be represented as
b

It can be easily verified that normalization by a smaller power of N leads to the same tri­
vial result of the sum of the random quantities increasing with the number of additives.
Meanwhile, if it is normalized by a larger power of N, the characteristic function becomes
the same unity and the probability distribution is the delta function, pN(x) -► S(x). This
also reflects a simple result that a sum of small numbers is small.

22

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

p(k) = 1 - ^ - +
2/v

0(N~i/2)

a2k2

\N

Then

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

(

1 " — + 0(N-"2)J ^e

o2 2

*
2

,

where a2 is the dispersion of £. We see that the limiting value depends
only on the dispersion a2. The corresponding probability density is given
by

p(x) = —=e2°.

(8)

Oy]2n

This is the well known Gaussian distribution.
We see that a sum of a large number of small independent random
quantities has the Gaussian distribution. For the limit N-+ cc, value of
the sum of the finite independent random quantities £„can be obtained
simply by dividing the above result by N[/2:

X L = yfNaC ,

(9)

where £ is the Gaussian random quantity with zero average and unit
dispersion. For non-vanishing mean value of £„ the right-hand side of (9)
is supplemented by an additional term #(<!;).
Of course, random quantities are not always independent. Deviation
from mutual independence of random quantities £, and <J2 can be
characterized by the correlator (£,£2) — (£,) {&). For independent quan­
tities, this correlator vanishes. There exist dependent random quantities
with vanishing correlators of this type, but for Gaussian variables
independent and uncorrelated are synonymous.
Inter-correlations of random quantities can strongly affect probabilis­
tic situations. A well known example considers a passenger who goes to

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

THE CHANCE ON STAGE

23

an underground station at random by a chosen moment of time. It seems
natural that he has equal chances to depart in each direction if he takes
the first train that comes to the station. Actually, however, the probabi­
lity of departure in a certain direction can considerably be larger than
1/2. This is due to the correlation in the schedules of the trains. If, say,
the trains in both directions come with the time interval At but the train
to one direction comes by St ( « At) earlier than the other, the probability
of taking the train to the latter direction is lower by St I At. Of course, in
real life such correlations are not very tight. Nevertheless, the reader can
verify this result at the nearest underground station.
Formula (9) expresses the central limit theorem. It is this theorem that
has made the probability theory important not only for a habitue of the
casino but also for a physicist. Experimental data processing heavily
relies on the central limit theorem. Of course, every experiment should be
treated individually but the majority of methods are based on the central
limit theorem.
In a simplest case, the experimenter deals with N independent
identically distributed random quantities. Their realizations are the
results of measurements. These random quantities have the same mean
value (£) whose determination is the goal of an experiment. Root-meansquare deviation a of these quantities is usually known and it determines
the accuracy of the measurements. Arithmetic mean of the measured
values is a random variable with the same mean value (£) and the rootmean-square deviation aN~xn. According to the central limit theorem,
for large number of measurements N, the arithmetic mean is approxima­
tely a Gaussian distribution whose dispersion decreases with N. Estima­
tion of the difference between the arithmetic mean of measured values
and the true mean value (£) requires only a standard procedure available
in any modern computer as the least squares algorithm. The problem is to
choose a relevant procedure. In order to develop this knowledge,
consider a specific example of data processing.
2.4. THE LEAST SQUARES METHOD
Our example considers the problem of determination of the age of rocks
with the use of physical methods. Practically every rock contains, in
microscopic quantities, radioactive elements. Relations among abund­
ances of a given radioactive element and products of its decay allows to

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

24

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

calculate the age of the rock. One concrete method is based on the
analysis of abundances of the radioactive isotope of strontium 87Sr and a
product of its decay 87Rb. The laws of radioactive decay imply that,
provided the sample under investigation has been an isolated system
whose parts have not exchanged its matter during its lifetime, the
measured points lie on a straight line on the plane x = 87Rb/86Sr and
y = 87Sr/86Sr. Slope of this line is essentially the sample age, therefore the
line is called an isochrone, and the abovementioned plane, the isochrone
plane. Thus, determination of the sample age reduces to the problem of
drawing a straight line, the isochrone, based on data on abundances of
the isotopes of strontium and rubidium, that are, of course, contamin­
ated by errors.
The very errors of measurements are also determined experimentally
and their values are also some random variables, more or less deviated
from the true values. In a common situation, measured abundances and
their ratios have small errors, but the values of the errors can be
estimated only crudely. For instance, the strontium-rubidium abundance
ratio can be measured with accuracy to the order of 2%, but it cannot be
said whether it is 1.5%, 1.7% or even 2.3%. In this case it is prudent to
somehow overestimate the error, putting it equal not to 2%, but, say, to
3%, as a guaranteed upper limit.
This presumption allows to obtain a simple measure of the scatter of
measured points around a straight line. Let the slope a and some initial
value of the abundance ratio b be given. It is natural to measure x and y in
units of ox and ay, respectively. For given standard errors ax and ay, a
point can wander from the line to the largest possible distance if it
deviates along the direction orthogonal to the line. This distance can be
easily calculated also in the original coordinates. The sum of these
squared distances is that very measure of the scatter of the point about
the line. Of course, it depends on the points set and on a and b. The
method of the least squares consists of the minimization of the
normalized sum of squared deviations, the so-called residual. In the
considered example it is given by (Bruks et ai, 1972)

,_i

axa

+ ayi

THE CHANCE ON STAGE

25

On the other hand, we can estimate the residual from the point of view
of the probability theory, considering it as a sum of n squared Gaussian
quantities. The quantity, which serves as an upper admissible value of
the residual S(a, b) and corresponds to taking into account only those
events whose probability is at least 1 - P (say, P = 0.95, or 95%), is
denoted by Xn-i(P)- Its value can be found in tables of mathematical
statistics. For n > 30, the following asymptotic expressions can be used:

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

Xn{F) = \{yj2n-

1 + K,)2 ,

or

""-'v-s^Vw-

<10)

when P is close to 0 or 1, respectively. The quantity up (inverse error func­
tion) indicates how many standard deviations corresponds to the
adopted reliability level for the normally distributed random variable.
For instance, u„ = 1.9600 for P = 0.95 while uP = 3.2905 for P = 0.999.
Asymptotic expressions (10) imply that, according to the central limit
theorem, for large n the sum of squared deviations has a normal
distribution.
For an adopted value of P only those values of a and b are reliable, for
which
S(a,b)^X2n-2(P).

(11)

Before proceeding to the solution of inequality (11), which is the
central point of the method under discussion, we should make a few
notes. Inequality (11) is justified based on a number of presumptions.
First, errors are considered independent along the x- and y-axis. This
presumption can be verified by measurements of abundances and
isotope ratios in independent experiments. Furthermore, in the calcula­
tion of Xn(P), the errors are assumed to be Gaussian. In other words, it is
believed that experimental errors are formed under the influence of
many factors of nearly equal importance, rather than by some single
factor. In principle, this can also be verified but, when there are many

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

26

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

measured points, deviations from Gaussian statistics are negligible, again
due to the central limit theorem. Dealing with small number of
measurements is also dangerous because, strictly speaking, expression
(11) is applicable only when the function S(a, b) is either quadratic in a
and b (it can be verified that this is true only when the errors along one of
the axes are essential, i.e., either axa» ayor ay» oxa), or for large
number n of measured points. Experience in dealing with statistical
measurements indicates that n greater than 30 is very good (which is also
implied by a good applicability of the asymptotic expressions for Xn(H
for these values of «). An admissible value is n ~ 10. In practice, one
often meets even smaller values, n ~ 5-7; in these cases statistical results
should be treated with caution. And when n = 3-4, it is wiser to draw a
straight line with a ruler and estimate the errors simply by inspecting the
plot.
Inequality (11) is rather complicated and its straightforward solution
requires serious computations. Very frequently, experimental errors are
not very large, and parameters a and b can be successively found with a
ruler. This simple procedure can often yield the values a* and b*
corresponding to the minimum of the residual with an accuracy of 1
percent or even better. It is expected that true values of a and b deviate
from a* and b* not very strongly, by a few tenths of a percent. Formally,
in inequality (11), the unknowns are a and b, but in the denominator of
the residual a is multiplied by ax, the accuracy of the latter quantity being
much inferior to that of a. In this case it is natural to replace (11) by the
approximate inequality

!<*»-I1" 7Z~ ?"■'-'<*.
i-1

axA

(.2,

+ oyi

where A is the value of a estimated by the eye that corresponds to the
minimum of S(a, b). Solving inequality (12) instead of (11) we introduce
an additional error which is negligible in the considered case.
Inequality (12) can be solved quite easily. Level lines of the function
S(a, b), i.e., the lines S(a, b) = const., on the (a, 6)-plane (not on the

27

THE CHANCE ON STAGE

isochrone plane) are concentric ellipses with centers at the point a, b~
where S(a, b) reaches a minimum. The values of a and b can be found
from
8S dS
— =— =0
da db
to be

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

_

« l l « 2 3 — «13«22

a=

r

-;

«12«I3 _

«11«23

ail«22 _

(ai2)

b=

«II«22_(«I2)

-

where

hs

n

xf

v

<*22 =

'■<+<

n
2

1-1 A

a~

",

+J.

'■ - i -

/-i A ax

^

'

n

x,

V

1

*,-j>,-

~2'

«I3

°y,

=

^• 2 -l- ^ - 2 '

n

«23

-I A a yt+ al
2 2

x

*t

St

If'S'min = 5(a *; b*) is greater than #„2_ 2 (P), then there are no values of a
and b that satisfy (12) and the very isochrone model must be rejected. If,
we are
on the contrary, S(a, b) « xl-i{P),tnen
able to draw an ellipse
which envelopes the confidence region, i.e., the set of solutions to
inequality (12) that represent admissible values of the age and initial
isotope ratio.
One can easily write out the parameters of this confidence ellipse, e.g.,
lengths of its semi-axes. But they are not easy to interpret and do not give
directly estimates like a ± Sa and b ± Sb which are usually published.0
c

Note that the situation is even worse for the more rigorous inequality (11); in this case, the
confidence region is not an ellipse but a more complicated figure.

28

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

This difficulty is resolved in the following way. Instead of indicating the
boundaries of the confidence region, the values of errors for a and b are
published which only characterize crudely the size of the confidence
region. Fig. 2.3 illustrates this situation. The values of 8a and 8b can be
estimated from the simple expressions
\

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

8a

8b

V

X2n-2(P) - Sm
«22

The values 8a and 8b (see Fig. 2.3) are somewhat large. It can be easily
seen that
8a

8b

~8a~

~8b

-(^^y

where

y =
V«ii <*22

Fig. 2.3. Different types of uncertainties in the least squares method.

29

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

THE CHANCE ON STAGE

It is clear that the estimates of the errors cited in the literature are
necessarily very crude and it is hardly reasonable to try to estimate them
with accuracy of percentage.
We should also note that the confidence set and, consequently, the
errors Sa and 8b are random values themselves. This means, say, that if
we have determined the errors with reliability P = 95% and 20 isochrone
lines should be plotted, one of them can turn out to be erroneous. Of
course, it can even be the first plot: errors are always unexpected.
Let us illustrate this method using the studies of the Kalar range as an
example (Vinogradov et ai, 1983; Sokoloff and Bujakaite, 1984).
Experimental data are given in Fig. 2.4. The bars correspond to one
standard error along x and y axes. Undoubtedly, the points crowd around
the straight line. However, the minimal possible residual is 5min = 50.3,
which considerably exceeds xl (0.95) = 16.9. This means that a single
straight line cannot be drawn through all the points. Notice now that
experimental points cluster in two distinct groups. For each group a
straight line can now be drawn confidently. For the first group,
a = 0.04 ± 0.001, b = 0.071 ± 0.0003, 5min = 5.5 <^42(0.95) = 9.5.
For another group a = 0.037 ± 0.001, b = 0.7008 ± 0.0004, Smn=
0.94 < *32(0.95) = 7.8. In both cases y » 0.6 and, therefore, ~5a =
\ASaand~5b = lASb.
87Sr/86Sr

0.760

0.740

0.720

0.700
1.0

2.0

87Rb/86Sr

Fig. 2.4. Experimental points are poorly approximated by a single line (dashed) but a pair
of straight lines (solid) provides a good fit.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

30

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

Thus, the considered data indicate that there occured two events in the
history of the Kalary range, with ages 2.80 and 2.55 billion years.
We considered only one variant of experimental data processing with
least-squares method. The characteristic feature of this method is that the
resulting estimates are unbiased. In other words, when this estimate is
considered as a random variable, its mean value is exactly equal to the
true value. Meanwhile, the errors of estimated parameters decrease very
slowly with the growth of the body of experimental data. In expressions
for the errors (13), denominators au and a22 are of the order of the
number of measured points n; the quantities x2 and Smi„ in the nominator
are also of the order n. However, for a correct estimation of accuracy of
an individual measurement, it can be deduced from (10) that the
difference x2 — S ^ i s of the order of yfn, i.e., Saoc /T , / 4 and Sbccn~,/4.
When the error of an individual measurement, a, is significantly over­
estimated, the values of da and 6b do not decrease with the growth of n.
In the examples discussed above, we were concerned mainly with the
verification of the applicability of the model rather than the most
accurate estimation of the model parameters a and b. If one has a large
number of measured points (n is very large) and is confident in the
applicability of the model, then accuracy of estimation of the model
parameters can be considerably improved at the price of abandoning the
unbiased nature of the estimate. Small bias in the estimate sometimes
allows to reach a considerable suppression of experimental errors.
Moreover, in certain cases, an experimental device specially coordinated
with the applied method of data processing can have a better perfor­
mance than a more precise device constructed without proper specializa­
tion (see Pytyev and Shishmarev, 1983).
2.5. RANDOM FUNCTIONS, FIELDS AND OPERATORS
The description of nature usually goes beyond simple random quantities.
The physical characteristics of objects vary in time as, e.g., an output
noise of an audio amplifier. What is realized (heard) is a function £, (t, 10).
Here w is a point in the elementary-event space and t is the time. For
fixed /, £(co) is a common random quantity, and for fixed to, it is an
ordinary function of t which called a realization of the random function
Z(t,(o). Random functions of time are usually called random processes.

THE CHANCE ON STAGE

31

As we discussed in Section 2.2, probability can be understood as a
measure in the space of elementary events. Random quantity determines
a probabilistic measure on a line,

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

dfi = p(x)dx = dF(x)
(this measure is known as the Stiltjes measure), where x is the value of the
random variable, p(x) is the associated probability density. A random
process determines the measure in the functional space. This approach
will be discussed in the next chapter on the example of the Brownian
motion.
It is natural that for two very different moments of time t, and t2,
random quantities £0,) and £(t2) can be considered independent with
great accuracy. In other words, random processes do not remember their
past. Of course, formally one can envisage a random process with a good
memory, but usually such cases are rather rare. For close moments, the
quantities £(/,) and £(/2) are not independent: any physical system has at
least a small inertia and cannot forget its past immediately. Time is a di­
mensional quantity and the difference |f, — /2|can be large or small only
in comparison with a certain characteristic time T. The characteristic
time is individual for every random function and is known as the
correlation time. Just like any other characteristic parameter of a
physical system, the notion of characteristic time is somewhat ambiguous
and its definition should be stated in every single case. Different
definitions can lead to the values that differ by a multiplier of the order of
unity.
The degree of mutual dependence of the values of a random function is
characterized by the (auto) correlation function

that vanishes for independent functions

When a random function £(/) is statistically homogeneous in time

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

32

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

(stationary), the correlation function depends only on the time difference
B = B(\t, — t2\). Note that individual realizations £(/) are, of course,
non-stationary.
It is commonly presumed that correlations decay exponentially, as
exp (—|/, — t2\/r) or even as exp [— (?, — t2)2/z2], for |/, — t2\-* oo.
However, cases of slower, power-law decay can also be met (Bunimovich
and Sinai, 1981).
When a random function is a sum of many independent random
contributions, the central limit theorem states that at any moment it has
the Gaussian distribution. The Gaussian random function can be
completely described by its mean value and its correlation function. In
particular, its dispersion is equal to B(l, t). The non-Gaussian random
processes can, in principle, be described by a set of more complicated cor­
relations:

and others, that now cannot be expressed through the mean value and the
correlation function.
Random fields that vary in space, £(x, co), e.g., the random tem­
perature field, can be introduced in a similar way. Such fields are
characterized by a spatial correlator

B(x,y) =

(Z(xK(y))-(t(x))(Z(y))

which depends only on r = \\ — y| in the case of statistical spatial
homogeneity and isotopy. For small r, the correlation function is large;
for large ones, it is small. The characteristic distance r0, which
determines the smallness of r, is called the correlation radius. A
frequently used approximation is B(r) oc exp( — r/rQ) or exp ( — r2/r\,). It
is convenient to deal with dimensionless correlation functions for which
5(0) = 1.
Random fields can be considered not only in a physical coordinate
space. In many circumstances, the Fourier representation proves to be
useful. In this case, the spatial correlator transforms to

THE CHANCE ON STAGE

33

2?(k,, k2) = <£(k,, to)Z(k2, (o)) - <£(k,, to)) (£(k2, a)),
where £(k, OJ) is the Fourier transform of £(x, a>).
Spatial homogeneity implies that

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

5(k,,k 2 ) = J S(k,)^(k l + k 2 ),

where the function B(k), called the power spectrum of the random field,
is the Fourier transform of B(r).
If a random field depends both on space and time, it has both
correlation time and correlation radius; its correlation function depends
both on position and time. Vectorial and tensorial random fields are
described by correlation tensors.
A field of an isotropic and homogeneous scalar random quantity (say,
temperature) can easily be described, e.g., by its Fourier-transform. This
is accomplished by the prescription of the power spectrum of the field as
a squared function of the field depending on the frequency and modulus
of the wave vector. Meanwhile, the representation of a random vector
essentially depends on its nature. A random curl-free field can be
represented as a gradient of a random scalar function, and then the
problem of description reduces to that of a scalar field. For the solenoidal
random field (random magnetic field or turbulent velocity of incompres­
sible fluid), its three components cannot be considered as independent
random scalar fields, because the divergence-free condition must be
satisfied. This condition can be expressed through the field correlators
(Batchelor, 1953; Monin and Yaglom, 1973). However, the solenoidality
can be taken into account through the structure of the field itself. This
requires introduction of the special quantities designed for the descrip­
tion of a random solenoidal field. To be concrete, we shall refer to the
magnetic field.
Let us introduce a set of surfaces rj(r) = const., with the field of normal
vectors n = V?/. Then magnetic field can be introduced with the help of
two scalar potentials O and 4*:
H = V X (<Dn + W X n).

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

34

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

Thus, we see that the random magnetic field H(x, co) is described by
the three random scalar fields t](\, co), 0(x, co) and *¥(x, co) (see
Zeldovich et al., 1985). This description does not impose any symmetries
and ensures statistical homogeneity and isotropy of the field H, provided
the fields rj,Q>, and *F are statistically homogeneous. The solenoidality is
ensured automatically.
The theory also considers random operators, e.g., the heat transfer
operator (v-V) + /cA, where the velocity field v(t, x, co) is random. The
diffusivity K can also be a random quantity. Random operators can be
introduced in a more general way, but here we consider only the so-called
operators with random coefficients.
Fortunately, the introduction of these simplest operators does not
require the development of new approaches to the solution of associated
differential equations to prove the existence and uniqueness of theorems,
etc. It is sufficient to recall that, for a fixed random parameter co, an oper­
ator with random coefficients is a common deterministic operator.
Randomness only requires the introduction of the probabilistic measure
in the operator space or the space of solutions of associated differential
equations.
2.6. ERGODIC PROPERTIES, CHAOS, INTERMITTENCY
The central limit theorem has made a great impact on physicists and
mathematicians, which is indicated even by its name. It has enabled
mathematics to be applied to the studies of chaos in nature. The physical
concept has formulated chaos as a state that arises from the initial order
due to many mutually independent influences. According to the central
limit theorem, this state must be described, from probabilistic viewpoint,
by the Gaussian distribution. Depending on the tensorial properties of
the quantity under investigation, one would consider the Gaussian
random quantity, the random scalar and vector fields, etc.
The concept of chaos is closely linked with another concept of physical
statistics, i.e., ergodicity. Averaged values can be introduced not only as
integrals over the space of elementary events but also as averages over
ensemble, i.e., over many realizations of a random quantity. When one
considers a random field where correlations decay in space and time, i.e.,
are of a statistical ensemble, it can be delegated to many considered

THE CHANCE ON STAGE

35

space-time points. Indeed, values of a random field and distant points are
practically independent and reproduce the result of independent realiza­
tions. Thus, the ergodic hypothesis asserts that

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

or

(Z(t,x))=jjz(t,x)dt,
the ensemble average is equal to both the spatial average and timeaverage. Formally, this assertion implies averaging over infinite spacetime but, physically, one always takes the averages over the physically
large space and time domains whose sizes far exceed the characteristic
scales of the problem at hand. Therefore, for a physicist ergodicity means
absence of large-scale structures which can strongly affect the spatial or
time average even when they are widely spaced.
Classical thermodynamics considers the strange and inexplicable
spontaneous formation of structures in nature, for example, the patterns
of frost on window panes during the cold winter, the regular arrays of
convective cells in liquid, or the coloured layers in the gems jasper and
agate. Any sort of lining matter seems to violate thermodynamics. It can
be easily understood how the entropy can decrease in its self-organization
processes. Increase in the entropy of the system as a whole, e.g., with re­
gard to the heat transfer during ice crystallization or, during the food
combustion in a living organism, is much greater than the local decrease
of entropy associated with the formation of the structures.
A principally different approach invokes the chance to explain the
spontaneous order in many particle systems. The approach can be
compared with synergetics which employ somewhat similar ideas.
However, the cornerstone of synergetics is of nonlinear processes and
chance is only invoked to produce a small seed for nonlinear instabilities.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

36

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

Meanwhile, structures are typical of random media in transfer pheno­
mena that are described, at a certain stage, by linear differential
equations. In these cases, randomness is a basic mechanism of creation of
a structure, while nonlinearity, which interferes at the later stages,
prevents its infinite growth. The structures that thereby arise in random
media have a very special character: they are essentially strong enhance­
ments, or peaks randomly scattered in space and time. The gaps between
the peaks of the random quantity has low values; the gaps themselves are
widely spaced and rare.
A general term that describes such a picture is "intermittency". This
concept has been introduced by Batchelor and Townsend (1959) for the
patched temperature distribution in turbulence. Intermittency was also
studied in hydrodynamic turbulence in connection with Landau's
refinement to the hypothesis of Kolmogorov and Obukhov (see, e.g.,
Monin and Yaglom, 1973), and in the theory of wave propagation in
random media (Rytov et al., 1978). One more example is the localization
effect the in the quantum theory of disordered media thoroughly studied
by I.M. Lifshitz and his co-workers (1982).
Intermittency has been revealed by numerical experiments in magnetohydrodynamics (Meneguzi et al., 1981) as well as in the galaxy
formation theory that has been supported by astronomical observations
of the structure of the universe (Shandarin and Zeldovich, 1986).
From a physical point of view, intermittency arises due to the
coherence introduced by the random medium into the process of transfer
of the considered physical quantity. For example, in a random flow of
conducting fluid with an embedded magnetic field, there exist places
where the flow efficiently amplifies the magnetic field by stretching the
field lines (Molchanov et al., 1985). Of course, such places are rare,
having a small chance to happen. However, these maxima make a
dominating contribution to the magnetic energy. They determine the
average field and its square and cannot be ignored. The two first
moments, however, are not enough to describe the magnetic field
distribution completely. The principal and characteristic property of
intermittency is the abnormal relation (when compared with the Gaus­
sian one) between the consequent statistical moments. In terms of the
Fourier analysis, intermittency is characterized not only by the slow
decrease of amplitudes of the Fourier modes with wave number, but also

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

THE CHANCE ON STAGE

37

by certain phase relations among them. If instead the high modes had
random phases, their combination would be close to the Weierstrass
function, i.e., a fractal distribution rather than isolated peaks. On the
contrary, a sum of specially phased plane waves are combined into a
delta-function or a set of delta-functions.
In a statistically homogeneous medium, intermittency can be a pro­
nounced phenomenon: in the presence of instability, e.g., when the
magnetic field is self-excited, the ratio of the mean magnetic energies in
the regions occupied by the peaks of the magnetic field and the
background regions grows exponentially in time. On the other hand, in a
spatially bounded domain, the characteristic distance between the high
peaks grows, and at a certain moment of time, it becomes greater than the
size of the domain. Afterwards, the spatial and ensemble averages cease
to be identical, with the spatial averages growing slower than the
ensemble ones. This intermittency in a bounded problem can be less
sharply expressed.
The spatial structure of an intermittent distribution is a very important
property. Temporal evolution asymptotically brings to high isolated
peaks; in space, these peaks correspond to highly magnetized spots
divided by vast regions of weaker intensity. However, an intermediate
asymptotic behaviour may be, or even typically is, the formation of
cellular or network structure: thin channels of high intensity ("enriched
phase") isolate, one from another, islands of "poor phase". An example
of such intermediate-stage intermittency is provided by the structure of
the universe (Shandarin and Zeldovich, 1984). In optics, the problem of
structures arises when one considers the passage of light through a plate
with a random profile. This situation is described formally as an
evolution of a random initial distribution in a deterministic medium. At
a short distance from the random surface, the structure determined by
caustics reappears. It is washed out at greater distances from the plate;
and the influence of initial random conditions diminishes.
These intermittent phenomena can be directly observed (Fig. 2.5) or
revealed numerically (Fig. 2.6).
Note that the problem of the onset of intermittency is, in a certain
sense, inverse with respect to the widely discussed problem of the onset of
chaos from regular motion in a dynamical system governed by a small
number of ordinary differential equations.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

38

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

Fig. 2.5. A magnetogram obtained at the observatory Kitt Peak in 1982 (Giovanelli, 1984).

Even a Gaussian random field is not free from some elements of order.
The general background of a Gaussian field is produced by a random,
unordered variation of the quantity <p whose amplitude is of the order of
b1' 2(0). The rare high peaks can be detected against this background. In
general, the level surfaces near a peak are close to triaxial ellipsoids.
However, the higher a peak is, i.e., the larger the ratio of its height to the
r.m.s. deviation, the more probable is the mutual closeness of all these
axes, the closer are the level surfaces to sphere. Therefore, near the top, a
peak is not sharp but has the regular shape of a rotationally-symmetric
surface whose meridian in an isotropic case, which is similar to the plot
of the function b(r), r = |x — y|. One can easily estimate the maximum
peak height in a given sphere and the distance between the peaks.
Of course, these peaks can also be detected when one observes many
realizations of a Gaussian quantity. The existence of the peaks is widely
known but they play a minor role in the usual operations with the

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

THE CHANCE ON STAGE

39

Fig. 2.6. Magnetic concentrations (shaded) in the numerical simulations of Meneguzzi et
al. (1981).

Gaussian random quantities, e.g., in processing of experimental data
with the least square method. Roughly speaking, one can ignore the peaks
of arbitrary heights by the consideration that the Gaussian quantity has a
maximum deviation equal to three standard deviations (the Gauss rule).
However, in many cases, such an approach can lead to dramatic errors.
Consider for example, a very long pipeline whose breaking strength is
uniform with high accuracy, but which is afflicted with a small random
Gaussian error. When the standard deviation of the strength is much
smaller than the reserved strength of the pipeline, one is tempted to
believe that the pipeline would be very reliable, i.e., it has a low
probability to rupture. This logic is typical of the existent pipeline
designs. However, this assertion is true only for short pipelines. The
breakdown of a very long pipeline can be caused by a single, improbable

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

40

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

damage. This damage can be caused by a very rare deviation that is much
larger than the standard one. If the correlation length along the pipeline is
in the order of a meter, the deviation equal to ten standard ones can be
expected to occur over the length of 10,000 km (see similar discussion in
Sect. 7.5). The situation can be much worse when the distribution is nonGaussian, e.g., the log-normal with the Gaussian distribution of the
logarithm of a random (positively determined) quantity.
When the probability distribution of a random quantity decreases at
infinity slower than the Gaussian one, high peaks are, evidently, more
abundant, i.e., the associated structureness is more pronounced. Such
enhancement of order can be intrinsically associated with many effects;
the clearest is the situation when the random deviation is determined not
by many independent, equally important, effects but by one dominant
factor. Taking a pipeline as an example again, it can be easily seen that
such a situation arises when the pipeline passes through a region of land
with rapidly and strongly variable properties. For instance, it can be a
region of permafrost where frozen regions are mixed with thawed-out
ones. The exploitation of pipelines shows that such conditions are very
unfavourable for estimating reliability based on the comparison of the
abovementioned standard deviation and the reserved strength. In this
case, principally different arguments are required, such as those
employed in the studies of the conductivity of disordered metallic media.
When a random error that afflicts the measurements has a nonGaussian tail of probability distribution, the application of the least
square method can lead to serious mistakes. It follows, in particular, that
one should single out the results spoiled by the wild errors in measure­
ments. Such wild errors have nothing in common with the Gaussian
random errors that occur regularly and the wild error, of course, cannot
be averaged together with the normal ones. The selection of faulty results
does not represent a problem when the data set is not very large and an
experimenter can control the results. However, the situation is more
complicated when the data processing must be completely computerized.
This requires the development of special methods insensible to faults in
measurement. Such methods are known as robust (see, e.g., Dawldy and
Eckman, 1984).
It is not difficult to give an example of probability distribution that
gives less pronounced peaks than the Gaussian distribution. Such

THE CHANCE ON STAGE

41

distribution has the quantity C = a<p2/(<?2 + <p2), where q> has a Gaussian
distribution. It is evident that £ simply cannot have any peak whose
height considerably exceeds the standard deviation.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

2.7. EQUILIBRIUM AND TRANSITION PROBABILITY
The concluding two sections of this chapter are devoted to the concept of
probability, considering a typical problem of establishment of a stable
equilibrium.
This can be a chemical equilibrium: the considered substance A is
formed from another substance B and can, in turn, be decomposed
producing B again. The equation that governs the number of molecules of
the substance in a vessel A, denoted by n, is given by
dn
— = kxnB - kn .
The coefficients ks and k are given constants. The concentration of the
substance B, nB, is considered large and practically constant during the
reaction, so that the product kx B can be considered constant and denoted
as b. Thus

— = b-kn.

(13)

A similar equation also describes the following situation. Imagine a
vessel with a small hole that is connected with a large vessel (the
atmosphere). In the large vessel the gas concentration n0 is constant. The
problem is to calculate the number of the density of molecules in a small
vessel. The smallness of the hole, as compared with the free path of the
molecules, is essential for the flow of the gas to have the character of
random passage of molecules through the hole in either direction. (When
the hole is large, a collective hydrodynamic flow occurs and the
governing equation changes.) This process is described by the equation

42

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

— = —nvS + n0vS,
at
where S is the hole area, and v is the r.m.s. velocity of the molecules.
Choosing the relevant variables, we again come to equation (13).
Equation (13) can be solved quite easily. For instance, for the initial
condition n = 0 at / = 0 we obtain

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

n=nj\-e-,h),
where nx = b/k and x = k~l.
However, we failed to take into account that n, the number of
molecules, is an integer. A popular Soviet poet Samuel Marshak has
admonished children against such mistakes: "And the solution we heard
was two men and two thirds".
This problem is essentially probabilistic. With the proper account of
the integer value of n, considerations in terms of probability of changing
the number of molecules in the vessel by one per unit time are necessary.
When the problem is probabilistic, the solution must be sought not as a
smooth function n(t) but rather as a probability distribution, i.e., a set
P(n, t) of the functions defined for integer values of n = 0, 1 , . . . that do
not depend smoothly on /.
Then the governing equation changes to
dP(n, t)
— - ~ = bP(n-l,t)
at

+ k(n+l)P(n+\,t)-bP(n,

t)-knP(n,

t).

Indeed, the given number of molecules, n, can be produced either by
adding one molecule to (n — 1) molecules that are still in the vessel or by
the loss of one molecule if their number was (« + 1). The state of n mole­
cules is changed when a molecule is either lost or gained. The probability
of gaining a molecule does not depend on the number of molecules in a
small vessel while the probability of a loss of a molecule is proportional to
the number of molecules in the vessel. These presumptions lead to the
given differential equation but we should assume that n is large; and, of
course, neglect that n is an integer.

43

THE CHANCE ON STAGE

However, the classical equation for n(t) can be derived from the chain
of equations for P(0, t), P(\, t),...,
P(n, t),
Consider an example where the solution can easily be given in a closed
form: at the initial stages of filling a small vessel, the loss of molecules
from it can be neglected. In this case

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

dP(n, t)
— K — - = A[P(n-

l,t)-P(n,t)],

where A is the probability for a molecule to come into the vessel.
Initially, let P(0, 0) = 1 for / = 0, and P(n, 0) = 0 for n > 0, i.e., the
vessel is initially empty. Then the exact solution reads
P(0,t) = e-A,,P(n,t)

=

-(Atre-A'.

Let us check that the sum of all probabilities is unity. As follows from
1 + At + ~(Atf
2!

+ ... + -(At)n
n\

= eA',

the sum is indeed unity:
00

Y, P(n, t) = eA'e~A' = 1 .
The probability distribution obtained is known as the Poisson distribu­
tion.
Consider the behaviour of the solution of At » 1. The value of n for
which P is maximal is determined by
dP(n, t)
—
=
an

P(n,t) , itnt
+ AtP(n, t) = 0 ,
n

which gives «max = At, a natural and understandable result. This result
cannot be considered rigorous since we have calculated the derivative as

44

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

if P(n, t) is a smooth function of n although n is valued as an integer. To
be rigorous, one should calculate the average number of particles,
CO

« = ^ nP(n, t) = At.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

A slightly less trivial operation is the calculation of the mean squared
deviation,
oo

(n-n)2

=

^(n-At)2P{n,t).

This quantity turns out to be equal to (At)2. For large n, the distribution
around n is very close to the Gaussian one. In particular, with the
probability of 95% the value of n lies between At + n(At)U2 = n + fin"2
and At — n(At)[/2 = n — fmu2 where n is in the order of unity.
Similar results can be achieved, with more time and paper spent, in the
problem when the motion of molecules is allowed in both directions
through the hole. The fundamental difference is the fact that now the
temporal growth of n saturates at some stationary value ns. The number
of molecules approaches the stationary value according to the law
n = n,(l - e~»)
where /? = const.
However, just like the case of incoming particles, the distribution of
the number of molecules around the average value is Gaussian. In
particular, the number of molecules continues to fluctuate in time even
wben the average number n becomes stationary, fit» 1. The final state is
stationary in average but fluctuative. The plot of n versus / resembles a
trajectory of a Brownian particle that wanders under the combined
influence of elastic returning force and the random driving force.

THE CHANCE ON STAGE

45

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

2.8. SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION OF PARTICLES IN GASES
Many fields of physics, e.g., the theory of gases and solutions, the
turbulence theory and cosmology often employ the notion of spatial
homogeneity. In this section we analyze this notion in greater detail.
The air uniformly fills a room. Every equal volume contains an equal
number of molecules, that is, 2.7 X 10'9 molecules per cubic centimeter
under normal conditions. It is obvious, however, that at microscopic
scales, this homogeneity must be violated; the average number of
molecules in an ultra-small volume 3 X 10~2 cm3 is unity. In even
smaller volumes, the numbers of molecules are smaller than unity, but a
molecule cannot be divided between the two such volumes.
To the first approximation, in a volume with the average number of
molecules equal to a, with a« 1, resides one molecule with the
probability a; the volume is empty with probability 1 — a. This situation
is quite familiar as we have discussed such situations above. In
particular, for an average number of molecules a (which can either be
greater or smaller than unity but always positive) in the simplest case, we
have found the probability distribution P(0) = e~a, P(l) = ae~", . . . ,
P(n) = (a"/n\) e~a. The coefficient of the exponential function for P(ri) is
the «th term in the Taylor series for ea. This probabilistic result can be
checked experimentally by many consequent measurements of the
number of molecules, i.e., by detection of many realizations of the same
probabilistic situation. After that, the desired probability can be obtained
as the fraction of realizations where the considered event occurs.
In the example with the number of molecules in a given volume, there
is one more possible approach. Choose a small sub-volume and count the
molecules within it; the result depends on time. Every time a molecule
comes in or out of this sub-volume, a new realization occurs.
Thus, we can determine the function n(t) of the total number of
molecules versus time. This function is not smooth (Fig. 2.7) but consists
of horizontal segments (n = 0, 1,...) connected by vertical segments of
unit length. The size of a molecule is considered small as compared with
the size of the sub-volume. Therefore, the time of passage through the
boundary of a sub-volume is small. In practically every case, except in
very artificial situations, the average over many realizations and the

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

46

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

Fig. 2.7. The number of molecules within a given volume as a function of time.

time-average coincide. The scientific term for this intuitively clear
assertion is "the ergodic hypothesis".
However, we spend time discussing the spatial distribution of mole­
cules in a gas and not the formulation of the ergodic hypothesis. There are
more interesting, principally new, questions in this spatial problem: How
connected are the fluctuations in two neighbouring gas sub-volumes?
How do these fluctuations depend on the size and shape of the subvolume? How are they correlated in time?
If we apply these questions to a casino with many roulettes, the answers
are simple and evident: the events (gain or loss) at every roulette are in­
dependent. If the probability of event A at one roulette is P(A) and
probability of event B at another one is Q{B), the probability that both
events occur at the respective roulettes, R(A, B) is equal to the product,
R(A, B) = P(A)Q(B). However, the situation is different in the case of
two neighbouring volume elements Vx and V2 chosen in a gas. There is
considerable probability that a molecule that leaves the volume V{ will
enter the volume V2 and vice versa. How does this affect the probability
distribution for the respective numbers of molecules, «, and n2l
In the analysis of the evolution of the number of molecules with time,
the distribution over n is not the only important thing, i.e., the function
of time when nx *£ n *£ n2, but also the detailed dependence of n on t that
is determined by specific processes that change n.
Consider a volume whose size is significantly greater than the time
path of a molecule but still small when compared with the overall size of a

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

THE CHANCE ON STAGE

47

vessel. Then one can distinguish the bulk motion of the gas and the
acoustic waves in which density variations are accompanied by pressure
variations. The characteristic time of the change of the enhanced density
of the density below average is of the order of magnitude of the ratio of
the considered volume size to the speed of sound. The waves which are
shorter than the volume size are averaged out and do not contribute to
the variations of the average density. The longer waves make such
contributions but the number of independent long waves in a given vessel
decreases with the wavelength. This explains why the main contribution
comes from the waves whose lengths (the spatial period) are of the order
of the volume size, but rarely from longer waves.
Another factor that is important is the fluctuations of the temperature
(and entropy) in a given volume for constant pressure. A characteristic
time of the temperature fluctuations and associated density fluctuations
is of the order of the squared volume size divided by the diffusion
coefficient.
These two types of fluctuations can be distinguished by observing light
scattering in the gas because they produce different frequency shifts. The
theory of this phenomenon was developed by Landau and Plachek in the
thirties; its detailed discussion can be found in Statistical Physics by
Landau and Lifshitz (1964).
Note also that when one considers not only density but also the
averaged motion of molecules in a given volume, one should take into
account not only the wave motion but also the transverse motion which is
the vortex bulk motion of the gas. Only then can one arrive at the correct
relation mV2/2 = 3/2 nkT. In this respect an elementary volume of a
gas or liquid behaves as an individual molecule. A similar result was
discussed above where we considered Brownian motion of dust particles.

CHAPTER

THREE

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

DIFFUSION

3.1. THE DIFFUSION COEFFICIENT
Consider a solution of some substance, e.g., sugar in water. Denote the
sugar concentration by g and its dimension by gem"3. The number of
sugar molecules in 1 cubic centimeter is given by n = Ag/fi, where A is
Avogadro's number, 6 X 1023 mole -1 , and fj. is the molecular weight; for
sugar(C12 H 2 2 O n )// = 12 X 12 + 22 X 1 + 11 X 16 = 344. In physical
chemistry, the molar concentration is often used, C = 1000 g/A =
2.89 g moles/litre.
Consider a weak solution in which the number of sugar molecules is
small as compared with that of the water molecules everywhere in every
part of the volume. The presence of sugar then weakly affects the
concentration of water in the solution and the water concentration can
always be considered constant. In addition, mutual interactions of sugar
molecules can be neglected. Every sugar molecule interacts only with the
neighbouring water molecules. The thermal motion of water molecules
results in the chaotic motion of a sugar molecule, every direction of the
motion being equally probable at any moment. The motion of a sugar
molecule at any moment is practically independent of the motion at the
preceding moment of time if the period between the considered moments
exceeds the characteristic time (10~9 s) between the successive collisions
of the sugar and water molecules.
As we have already noted, the motion of any sugar molecule is
independent of the position and motion of the other sugar molecules.
It is remarkable that the analysis of the behaviour of an individual
molecule turns out to be, in principle, more complicated than the analysis
49

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

50

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

of the solution as a whole, i.e., simultaneous consideration of a
tremendous number of sugar molecules, provided one is not interested in
the fate of individual molecules.
The trajectory of an individual molecule will be discussed in Chapter 4.
Following the historical development of the problem, here we discuss a
macroscopic problem: considering the number of molecules in unit
volume as a continuous variable, n = n (x, y, z, t), we seek the law of
evolution of n. A typical formulation of the problem assumes that an
initial distribution n (x, y, z, t) is prescribed for the moment t0 and the
problem is to find n (x, y, z, t) for an arbitrary moment / > /0The uniform time-independent concentration n0 = const, represents a
solution. Indeed, the uniform solution is a state of thermodynamic
equilibrium and therefore n (x, y, z, t) = n0, independent of both
coordinates and time, is a permissible distribution.
The next complex problem considers the distribution of n that initially,
at t = t0, depends only on x but not on y and z (one-dimensional
problem).
Let us consider the surface x = const, and count the number of sugar
molecules that pass through this surface in both directions along y and z
axes. Two different simplifications can be adopted in this analysis. The
first model endows sugar molecules with fixed velovity v. The velocity
vector can be directed at any point with equal probability. Thus, (v) = 0
and (v2) differs from zero. In the following the velocity v = (v 2 ) l/2 is
considered as a "characteristic" one.
The characteristic velocity of the motion along the x-axis is given by"

* The inelegant factor 3"* arises due to the fact that the average velocity is defined,
irrespective of the direction,
(v2)=(v2x)+(v2y)+(v2I).
This gives (v2x) = -(v 2 ). For 0 = (t>2)'/2 and vx, = (vl)"2 the equality in the text is
recovered.

51

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

DIFFUSION

Let us now presume that there exists a certain average time period T over
which this velocity remains constant. In other words, we consider the
molecules with a given value of vx and this velocity is presumed to be
fixed for a period T. After this period, interaction with the chaotic motion
of water molecules changes vx and a new value v'x can be arbitrary. It does
not depend on the value of vx during the preceding period T. Of course,
the parameter T has a probabilistic character some sugar molecules
change their velocities after a period 0.5 T, others after 1.5 T. Of course,
different molecules change their velocities to different extents. Approxi­
mately half the molecules have the velocity vx = 3~' /2 8, the remaining
ones have vx= — 3~I/2C. During the period T, they travel over the
distance Ax = ±VXT. At a given moment, those molecules pass the
surface x = const. = x0 moving in the positive direction in which they
started their free motion at a distance Ax from the surface, i.e., at
x0 — Ax. Consequently, the flux of molecules moving in the positive
direction through the surface is

Q\ =

1

vx-n(x-Ax).

The opposite flux is

g2 =

1

vx-n(x+Ax).

Thus, when n depends on x, the fluxes do not compensate each other! The
net flux is given by
V

x

Qx = Q\~ Qi = y l"(x - Ax) - n(x + Ax)].
Expansion of n(x) as a Taylor series leads to
dn
dn
dn
Qx= ~vx — Ax= -vx — vxx= -VXT—=
dx
dx
dx

1 , dn
--{v )T — .
3
dx

52

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

The flux turns out to be proportional to the concentration gradient; the
proportional coefficient is called the diffusion coefficient and denoted by
D:

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

dn
dx
The flux is directed toward the position with a smaller concentration.
Thus, on average, the sugar molecules travel from the regions of greater n
to the places where n is smaller.
This diffusion law established by Fick in 1855 can be easily generalized
to the case of n dependent on all three coordinates,
q = -DV«.

(1)

Therefore,
dn
Qx=

-D—

dx
is one of the components of the flux vector. The dimension of q is cm - 2
s~' while the dimension of n is cm -3 . Thus, D is measured in cm2 s"1. The
dimension of the diffusion coefficient does not depend on the specifica­
tion of the flux and density, whether in weight, volume, or molar units,
provided only these units correspond to each other (cm -2 s"1 and cm"3,
or gcm~2 s"1 and gem -3 , or mole cm" 2 s - 2 and mole cm" 3 ). From this
dimension of D, we see that D can be constructed as D ~ V2T or D ~ vl,
where v is the r.m.s. velocity [cm s~'], T is time between collisions [s], and
/ is the free path length [cm].
Let us now turn to an alternative schematic description (model) of
motion of the sugar molecules. Consider the sugar solution as a sponge
with fixed positions, "holes", where sugar molecules can rest. A molecule
rests in this or that "hole" during an average period T and then jumps into
a neighbouring "hole" separated by the distance /. The jumps are
instantaneous, i.e., they occur in a time r', much smaller than T. The flux
is of course given by

53

DIFFUSION

q

/2

DVn, D = - ,
T

where z is a mean residence time in a "hole". It is convenient to introduce
the probability WAt of leaving a "hole" during a short period At. The
mean residence time is then expressed as r = W~'. The dimension of
W is 5 ~' and the diffusion coefficient can be written as

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

D = I2 W.
Thus, we have considered two alternative descriptions of the motion:
(i) Free motion of sugar molecules with constant velocity during the
period T after which the velocity changes and the next period of free
motion follows.
(ii) The rest of finite oscillations within a hole during the period r and
subsequent instantaneous jump and capture into another hole.
The former description is relevant for molecular diffusion in gases.
The latter picture adequately describes the admixture motion in solids,
e.g., a crystal. The diffusion of a substance dissolved in a liquid (sugar in
water) is rather better described by the former picture. However, in both
cases we consider the periods over which the probabilistic character of
the considered processes is smoothened. As a result, in both cases the
same diffusion law (1) emerges. The details of a molecular motion
determine the particular value of D but the diffusion law (1) is always the
same.
What is left is a trivial step: based on the flux q, determine the
evolution of the concentration. The conservation equation for the mass
of the considered substance gives
dn
— = - V q.
at
Therefore,
— = V(DV«).

(2)

54

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

For constant D,
dn
= Z)VV«
dt

=DAn,

(3)

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

where A is the Laplace operator, or
dn _

(d2n

tfn

d2n\

dt

W

dy2

dz2/'

Consider a simple particular form of n(x) shown in Fig.3.1 and
concentrate on three points, x and x ± Ax. Introducing the Taylor
expansions, we obtain a discrete representation of the Laplace operator
(in one-dimensional case):

Hi
dt

D{—2

1
.) (Ax)

2

Now distinguish on the right-hand side the contributions from the
molecules arriving and leaving at a given surface:

X-4 X X

X+ 4 X

Fig. 3.1. Illustration of the discretization of the Laplace operator.

55

DIFFUSION

f
n(x, t+M)

= n(t)

DM "I
1

n+ + n.

DAt

+

.

2

L

(Ax) ]

2

2

(Ax)

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

This representation clearly indicates that diffusion — a random motion
— levels the concentration.
In the early twentieth century, before the advent of computers, the
following graphical method devised for the solution of the diffusion
problem was proposed: choose At and Ax so that
n(x, t +M) =

n+ + «_

.

Each step is reduced to drawing a straight segment connecting the
points n+ and «_ with n(x, t + At), representing the segment's middle
point. This method can be generalized to three dimensional cases.
Indeed, it is known that the Laplacian of a scalar function at a point r is
equal to the difference (divided by r2) between the function's value
averaged over the spherical surface of radius rand its central value. Thus,
diffusion both in one and three dimensions leads to n(r,t + At)
becoming equal to the average value of «(r, /) over a certain sphere.
3.2. SOLUTIONS OF THE DIFFUSION EQUATION
In this section, we consider several typical situations and the cor­
responding solutions of the diffusion equation (3).
(i) A vessel with impenetrable walls. In this case, the normal com­
ponent of the flux vanishes at the wall. Denote the vector normal to the
wall by m. Thus, qm = (qm) = 0 at the wall. It can be easily verified that
in this case N = Snd\ = const. A general solution with an arbitrary
initial distribution, n(x, y, z, t = 0), can be found by separation of the
variables:
n(x, y, z,t) = ^ Aknk(x, y, z)e~y"'
k

56

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

where the eigenfunctions nk obey the following equation:
-yknk

= Ank

with corresponding boundary conditions.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

When nk are restricted by the normalization condition fnkd3\ = 1,
the coefficients Ak can be found from the following expansion of the
initial distribution:
= \n(x, y,z,t = Q)nkd\

The eigenfunction with the smallest eigenvalue by modulus, y = y0, is
constant:

y

°

_ N
= 0,■ n-Q = n=-=

f
\n(x,y,z,t

,d\
= 0)v

For t -» oo, any initial distribution tends to this eigenfunction at the rate
determined by the value of y,. By the order of magnitude, y, = D/R2,
where R is the vessel size.
(ii) Consider a vessel whose walls are membranes washed from the
outside by solutions of a given concentration (Fig. 3.2). The concentra­
tion at one membrane is prescribed to be n = nx while n = n2 at another
membrane. The values of the derivatives dn/dm at the membranes are
not given in advance; they should be determined.
In this case separation of the variables leads again to a single steady
solution:
y = 0, n = n(x, y, z), An = 0 .
However, in contrast to the case (i), now n / const. It is only natural
because the values of n are different on different membranes. In the
simplest case of a cylinder with membranes at the ends (Fig. 3.3) we
obtain « = «, + («, — n2) x/L, independently of y and z.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

DIFFUSION

57

Fig. 3.2. A vessel with the ends covered with semi-permeable membranes (shaded).

The static solution is the equilibrium state and a stationary flux
Q [9s ' ] passes through the vessel in this state,

J<

(«*),

where ds is the area element of the vessel's cross-section. The flux is the
same for any cross-section within the vessel. At the vessel boundaries,

Fig. 3.3. A cylindrical vessel with membranes at the ends. The arrow indicates direction of
the particle flux.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

58

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

this state is maintained by fluxes flowing through the membranes: the
flux through one membrane supplies the dissolved substance while the
flux through the other membrane carries away the same amount. It is
important, however, that a substance is supplied at an enhanced
concentration and evacuated at a reduced one.
Consider the whole closed system that includes not only the vessel with
membranes but also volumes that contain solutions washing the mem­
branes from outside. Then we can see that the presence of the vessel with
membrane walls and with a stationary gradient of concentration within it
leads to the growth of entropy, and makes the whole system approach
equilibrium. When the outer volumes are large, the concentrations
within them vary only slowly and the solution for the inner vessel is
nearly stationary. Then we can write
ri\ Vx + n2 V2 = const.,

j t (n2 V, + n2 V2) = DJ(Vn)2d\ ,

(4)

where the integral on the right-hand side is taken over the inner vessel
volume. These equations can be derived from the following considera­
tions. The total amount of the dissolved substance is N = n, Vx + n2 V2.
Consequently, a mean concentration that is settled in equilibrium is
given by
__N_
N
w, K| + n2 V2
" ~~ ~V ~ Vx + V2
K, + V2
Evidently, both N and n remain constant in the course of evolution. It
can be seen easily that
n] Vi + n\ V2 = n2(Vt + V2) + («, - n)2 F, + (n2 - n)2 V2.
The combination of the type
(n-n)2V

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

DIFFUSION

59

can be considered a convenient measure of deviation from equilibrium.
The quantity («, - n)2 V, + (n2 - n)2 V2 measures the deviation of the
whole system from thermodynamic equilibrium. Taking everything into
account the leading role is played by the large outer vessels
whose volumes are Vx and V2. The amount of the dissolved substance
kept in the smaller inner vessel can be neglected. The quantity D(Vn)2 d3x
characterizes the contribution of the processes occuring in the volume
element d3x to the total rate of evolution toward equlibrium. This
quantity is analogous to the combination v(dvjdxk + dvk/Xjf in
hydrodynamics, with v the viscosity and v, the velocity components, that
determines the rate of transfer of kinetic energy into thermal energy.
The equation that describes the approach to equilibrium under
diffusion can also be written out easily for a single closed volume as

\n2d3x

= -2D I (Vnfd3x.

(4a)

The discussion of the role of mixing of diffusing liquid in a vessel is very
instructive. Equations (4) remain applicable even when the liquid
(solution) within the inner vessel is kept in motion. Obviously, motion of
the liquid does not affect the value of fn2d3x in the absence of diffusion,
as well as of any quantity of the type ff(n)d3x. In the course of the
motion, a small volume d3x in which the concentration is n changes its
position but neither n nor d3x vary. (For simplicity, we consider an
incompressible fluid.)
Consider a vessel in which the concentration varies in some regular
way, e.g., as n = a 4- bx. Diffusion leads to a gradual equalization of the
concentration. Asymptotically, for t -*■ <x> we have n = const. = n =
a + bx. Clearly, by mixing the liquid we can reach the equilibrium state
earlier. Does this not contradict the assertion above that mixing cannot
affect the value of ln2d3x1 The answer is: No! The point is that
mechanical mixing only indirectly affects the rate of evolution toward
equilibrium in diffusive systems; it enhances gradients (cf. Fig. 3.3) and
only then is diffusion intensified.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

60

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

3.3.

DIFFUSION IN INFINITE SPACE AND GREEN'S
FUNCTION

The solution of the diffusion equation in infinite space can be found
easily by separation of the variables. The eigenfunctions are plane waves
nk(t = 0) = eikx\ particular solutions are given by nk = e'kx~Dkt. The
sequence of wavenumbers k forms a continuous spectrum which implies
the necessity of employment of the Fourier integrals.
Consider a particular case when initially all the dissolved substance is
concentrated at one point. In other words, n0 is Dirac's delta function of
position. One can consider the problem in one, two or three dimensions.
In the real three-dimensional world, the one-dimensional distribution
«0 = 8{x) describes the initial concentration of the substance on a plane
x = 0 (y and z are arbitrary on this plane) as shown in Fig. 3.4. Twodimensional initial distribution i% = 62(s) arises when the substance con­
centrates at the z-axis. Finally, in three dimensions, the initial
distribution of the substance can be confined to a point, e.g., the origin
x = y = z = 0. In all the three cases, the coefficients of the Fourier
integrals are constants. The Fourier integrals can be easily derived
explicity. In one, two and three dimensions one obtains, respectively,

Fig. 3.4. The distribution n (x, y, z) ~ S(x) describes the matter confined to the plane x = 0.

DIFFUSION

1

* , = - ^ e x p ( - ^ ) ,

(5a)

n2 =

(5b)

JlnDt

^ t e X p \ [ ~ 2Dt
^ ^ 1/ '
i

M

3=

(—hr-)-

777 exp
(2TTZ)/)3/2

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

61

(5c)

This solution is remarkable in many respects. Let us begin with the
probabilistic interpretation of the diffusion process and this solution.
3.4. PROBABILISTIC INTERPRETATION OF DIFFUSION
Consider an individual molecule. At any given moment it is at some
specific, exactly determined, position.
Following this particle, one can draw its trajectory. It can be seen in
advance that this trajectory consists of many small straight line segments
positioned at different angles. The length of an individual segment is
equal to the crystal lattice period (of order several Angstroms) when the
particle diffuses in a solid or the free path length in a gas (in the order of
1000 Angstroms for a molecule of air under normal pressure). The
common methods of calculating velocity, length and other quantities
were developed for ordered smooth motions of cosmic bodies or of large
Earth-bound objects and they can hardly be applied to such a curve as
molecular trajectory.
We stress that apart from difficulties associated with unsmoothness of
the curve, i.e., with the properties of an individual trajectory, there are
difficulties of a more fundamental kind. They are associated with the
irreproducibility of trajectories. Subsequently, let us set some particles
free. Their trajectories are the same only statistically; every particle
moves along its unique trajectory different from another. A direct and
simple question, about where a given particle will be at the moment if it
was initially at the origin (/ = 0), has no definite answer when random
forces participate in shaping its trajectory.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

62

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

However a probabilistic answer can be given to this question.
Based on the statistical properties of the random force, one can find the
probability for a particle to be here or there at the moment /. In the case of
a crystal lattice, one can find the probability for a particle to occupy a cer­
tain lattice node; the nodes can be enumerated.
However, even when dealing with crystals, one never needs such
accuracy. It is sufficient to determine the probability that a particle is
within a certain volume dxdydz. It is understood that dx, dy and dz are
large when they are compared with the crystal lattice period, but small in
comparison with the average distance travelled by the particles. Then we
can introduce the probability density P(x, y, z) so that the desired
probability is
dW = P(x, y, z)

dxdydz.

Now, we should establish a connection between a statistical quantity,
viz., the probability density, and the description of diffusion given above.
For the determination of the probability density, one can perform
many an experiment by placing a particle at the origin and setting it free,
simultaneously starting a stop-watch. When a particle moves, being
driven by random kicks, one can record its position at a certain moment
/. This experiment is repeated many, say N, times and then one divides by
Afthe number of particles found within the volume element dxdydz. This
gives the probability density (that obeys an obvious requirement fPd3x
= 1).
Evidently, the motion of an individual particle does not depend on any
other particle set free earlier or later. If so, why should we not save the
experimental time?
Let us place all N particles at the origin and set them free simultaneous­
ly. Each particle moves along its own trajectory. At the moment t we re­
cord the positions of all particles. In this modification, the experiment is
exactly the same as that used for the investigation of diffusion! The initial
distribution is given by
n(x, y, z, 0) = Nd(x, y, z).
Since the diffusion equation is linear, its solution for N particles in three

63

DIFFUSION

dimensions is as follows:

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

n(x,y,z,t)

=N

'
(27r£/)3/2

e^120',

where r2 = x 2 + y2 + z2.
Hence, Green's functions of the diffusion equations (5a,b,c) are
essentially probability densities of the associated statistical problem.
A very important result of this discussion is the fact that the mean
squared path travelled in a given period is proportional to the length of
this period. Therefore, the mean velocity,
7 _ y[r~2

1

decreases with time as the reciprocal square-root of time. Sometimes this
random (diffusive, Brownian) motion is compared with the motion of a
"perfect drunk": after each step, he forgets the direction to his home and
takes the next step in an arbitrary direction. The total path R travelled in
m steps can be represented as the vectorial sum of n vectors r,, r 2 , . . . , rm.
Each vector r, corresponds to one step, has the length r and a random
direction.
Thus,
R = r, + r2 + ... + rm
R2 = \R\2 = (r, + r2 + ... + rm)2
= mr2 + r, • r2 + ... + r,• • rk + ...

(i*k).

For randomly chosen directions, all pairwise scalar products r, • rk,i± k,
vanish after averaging. This can be seen from the representation
r, • rk = r2 cos 8ik while the average value of the cosine of a random angle
is of course zero. Therefore,
/t 2 = mr2.

64

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

Since each step has the same duration, m is proportional to time.
This simple discussion reveals a fundamental fact: the travelled path
(R2)1'2 is proportional to the square-root of time:

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

y / F = ryfm ~ const, yfl .
This fact also follows from the solution of the diffusion equation. This
result should not be applied carelessly. Evidently, it is inapplicable to
periods shorter than the duration of a step because the statistical nature
of this result requires that many events have occured. On the other hand,
properties of the function exp (— r2/2Dt) imply formally that the
superluminal motions are possible even if they have low probabilities.
However, such a conclusion concerning hardly probable events cannot be
made again due to the statistical nature of the diffusion law. The
diffusion law is applicable only when the ratio r2/2Dt is not excessively
large. Notice that for the motion v = C this exponent becomes (Ct)2/2Dt
= C2t/2D, and is very large even for moderate or small t.
The diffusion equation can be used for the solution of probabilistic
problems in many more complicated cases.
One of the examples considers the random motion of particles near a
wall to which they adhere after collision. Let the initial distance of a
particle from the wall be r0 and consider the probability for this particle
to adhere to the wall in a given time. What distribution will the free parti­
cles have at the moment /? How do these probabilities behave for /-*•<»?
These problems are equivalent to the problem of diffusion with the
boundary condition n = 0 at the wall and the initial condition
«0 = S(r — r 0 ), where r0 is the initial position of a particle.
A formal solution can easily be derived in the case of a flat infinite wall.
The solution reduces to the introduction, apart from "positive" source at
r0, an additional "negative" source positioned symmetrically beyond the
wall. When the wall coincides with the surface x = 0, the solution for
x > 0 reads

65

DIFFUSION

Obviously, this function satisfies the diffusion equation, reduces to
S(x — XQ, y, z) for / = 0 and identically vanishes on the wall «(0, y, z, t)
= 0.
It can be shown that the total number of particles
0

oo

N=\dx\

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

oo

oo

dy\
—

cc

dzn(x,y,z,t).
—

oo

tends to zero for / -»• oo - all particles are bound to adhere to the wall! The
solution given above allows us to follow the adhesion process and to find
N(t) with N(0) = 1 and AT(oo) = 0.
The result changes in the case of adhesion, for instance, for a spherical
surface with particles initially positioned at some distances outside the
sphere.
However, it is not our aim here to solve the various diffusion problems
(and equivalently heat conduction problems).
The discussion above is aimed at demonstrating how the problems of
the probability theory formulated for a single particle can be translated
into the language of the diffusion theory.
3.5. DIFFUSION IN EXTERNAL FORCE FIELD
In this section, we discuss diffusion in the case where a particle's motion
is affected not only by random forces but also by some deterministic
ones. In the simplest cases, the latter can be considered time-independent
and arising from a potential. The usual arguments start from the fact that
under the action of any force, a particle acquires a certain acceleration.
The motion is governed by Newton's equation and the sum of the
particle's kinetic and potential energies is conserved. However, this
habitual approach to describing motion under a given force is of little
help in our problem.
In a fluid, an admixture molecule suffers irregular kicks from solvent
molecules. As long as the molecule is at rest on average, the average
numbers of kicks from different sides are equal to one another. However,
when the molecule acquires some average velocity u under the action of

66

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

an external force, the solvent molecules kick it more strongly, and more
frequently in the direction opposite to u as compared with the accompan­
ying direction. Thus, the force that arises counteracts the motion and is a
resistance force. For an individual molecule and for a small velocity, this
force is roughly proportional to the average velocity; the proportionality
coefficient must be negative because the force direction is opposite to the
velocity direction:

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

Frc* =

-OB

Therefore, quite soon after switching on the external force Fex„ which
remains constant, the particle accelerates to such a velocity that the total
force (sum of the external force and the resistance) vanishes:
F,ot = Fexl + Fres = Fext ~ CM = 0 .

Thus, the average velocity of particles is given by
The
quantity a is called the resistance coefficient. The reciprocal, a~' is called
the particle mobility; it is equal to the ratio of the average velocity to the
external force.
The equation for the particle trajectory is given byb
dx
1
u = — = - F exl (x).
at
a

(6)

Considering a spatial particle distribution n (x, t), for the evaluation of
the equation for n we can begin with the expression for the particle flux,
j = mi,

b

Equation (6) is known in the history of physics as the basic equation of Aristotle's
mechanics. The discussion above can therefore be interpreted, in the spirit of the
correspondence principle, as the establishment of the range of applicability of preNewtonian mechanics. In a historical context, it is important to stress that actual
differences between Newton's mechanics and the original approach of Aristotle are much
deeper than the differences between equation (6) and Newton's second law. Basically, in
the two millenia that elapsed between the eras of Aristotle and Newton, a new conceptual
apparatus for mechanics was formulated.

DIFFUSION

67

and apply the conservation law for the particle number,
dn
at

1 .
= _ V - j = - V ( m i ) = — V-(*F ext (x)).
a

(7)

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

This equation of partial derivatives is more complicated than the
trajectory equation.
The trajectory is described as a characteristic of this equation in partial
derivatives. Indeed, let the initial / = 0 and the particle distribution be
n(\, t0) = nQ(\). Consider a solution of the form
/i(x./) = «o(x(0).

(8)

Substituting (8) in (7), we obtain for x(0 equation (6) with the initial con­
dition X|,_0 = XQ.
What then is the advantage in replacing a simple equation for the
trajectory of an individual particle with a more complicated equation for
the particle distribution field?
In order to answer this question, we should have recourse to Section
3.4. The motion under random forces cannot be described by some
specific trajectory. This description requires the introduction of the
probability of the trajectory passing through a given point and the
probability density at any given moment. This probability density obeys
the diffusion equation, i.e., an equation in partial derivatives. Below we
present the description of motion under the combined action of two
forces, a deterministic force and random ones.
Since the presence of a random force necessitates the introduction of a
partial-derivatives equation for «(x, t), it is clear that this is also
necessary when the two forces are present. In preparation for this, we
have introduced n(x, t) and the associated partial differential equation
into a deterministic problem that could be solved in simpler terms,
through a set of trajectories
X = f(Xo, / ) •

We see that the partial differential equation that describes the evolution
of «(x, /) under the combined action of a deterministic external force and

68

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

random (vanishing in average) forces has the form

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

dn
1
— = - V - F « +V(DV«).
dt
a
Consider the simplest one-dimensional case when, in addition, F is
independent of time and has a potential, F = — dO/dx (this property is
trivial in the one-dimensional case) and the coefficients W = «"'
(mobility) and D (diffusivity), both independent of time and position.
Using the particle flux j as introduced above, we obtain
jx=

dt

dn
WFn - D—=
dx

-Wn

M>
dx

dn
D —,
dx

dx'

Let us write out an important static solution: j = 0, dn/dt = 0. The
variables separate giving
1 dn _ d\nn _WdQ>
n dx
dx
D dx '
/
n = const, expl
\

W
O
D
•

However, the particle distribution in stationary equilibrium must be
n = const, exp

-£

where k is Boltzmann's constant and T is the absolute temperature.
This brings us to Einstein's relation between mobility and the
diffusivity:
D = kTW.

(9)

DIFFUSION

69

Let us check the dimensions: D has the dimension cm 2 s _l , kTis energy,
gcm2s~2, and Wis a ratio of velocity to force, (cms~'):(gcms -2 ) = sg -1 .
Boltzmann's equilibrium condition can be extended to the threedimensional case:

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

j = WFn - DVn = -WnV<t> - DVn.

(10)

Condition j = 0 leads to n = const, exp (— W<b/D). The solution with
j = 0 agrees with the boundary condition at fixed impenetrable bound­
aries, j m = 0.
Einstein's relation D = kTW has played an important role in the
development of the molecular kinetic theory. The mobility of a sphere in
water can be determined with the help of the hydrodynamic theory of
motion of a sphere in a viscous fluid. Stokes' formula gives a = 6nR2ri,
where R is the radius of the sphere and r\ is the fluid viscosity. The diffu­
sion coefficient can also be estimated experimentally. Using the results of
suitable experiments, Einstein considered sugar dissolved in water and
used the measurements of the solution viscosity as a function of its
concentration in order to refine the estimate of/?. As a result, Avogadro's
number was obtained: the number of molecules in one gram-mole was
6 X 1023. Although the accuracy was not very high, this result shows that
the molecular theory is applicable not only to gases but also to liquids.
New papers of Einstein and other authors were published shortly after
in which ultra-small spheres in water were considered. The motion of
small particles which are, nevertheless, millions of times larger than
individual molecules, was first investigated by an English botanist Brown
(see Chapter 4). He had even considered the hypothesis that forces
specific to living matter play a role in this phenomenon. However, in the
early 20th century, it was shown that he had actually investigated a
manifestation of thermal motion.
J. Perrin's experiments with Brownian particles (whose size was
exactly known) also revealed their experimental distribution over height
in a gravity field which was consistent with the Boltzmann distribution.
This allowed him to measure the product kT. The pressure and the
volume of an ideal gas are related by PV = RT; the ratio R/k gives
Avogadro's number.
Let us return to the diffusion equation in this force field. The following

*

V

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

70

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

relations can be used to define the stationary state: dn/dt = 0, n = n(x).
Equation (7) shows that these relations are satisfied when V • j = 0; the
more stringent constraint j = 0 is excessive. However, the solution with
j ± 0 essentially differs from what was obtained above.
Indeed, when the force is a gradient of some potential O, we can write
j = — n[VQ> + DVlnw]. The vector j/n is potential.0 In a closed volume,
such a vector can differ from zero only when jm is non-vanishing at the
volume boundaries.
The physical meaning of this requirement is the following: the static
state, that is, the thermodynamic equilibrium state, can be maintained
infinitely long in a closed volume without external energy sources.
Meanwhile, the stationary state (d/dt = 0, j ^ 0) is possible only as long
as external sources of the total energy or free energy are available.
As an example, consider two connected large vessels with solutions of
distinct concentrations nt and n2, and in this case a potential field $ . In
the stationary state, the concentration in one vessel continuously
decreases while that in the other vessel increases. Therefore, entropy
grows and free energy of the whole system decreases.
Consider now the case of non-potential force, V X F / 0. Then a
stationary flow is driven within a closed vessel {Jm = 0 at the walls). This
stationary flow dissipates the energy supplied by the source of the vortex
force. Thus, consider the diffusion in the external potential force
supplemented by fluid motion.
The velocity of motion enters the diffusion equation through jm = nu.
The flow is usually (at least in liquids) incompressible, V u = 0.
Therefore, for n = const, we have
dn
— = - V j = - « V F -V(DVw) = 0 .
dt
The equilibrium with n independent of both position and time is not
violated by incompressible fluid motion.

c

We say that a vector is potential when not only Vjrj = 0 at any point within a vessel but
also § jd\ = 0 along any closed contour. When the vessel has a complicated topology, the
second definition is generally used.

71

DIFFUSION

However, as we have already noted, if the admixture distribution is
non-uniform at t = 0, then even the incompressible motion accelerates
evolution towards the equilibrium. If the fluid was at rest, the Boltzmann
distribution would arise for t -* oo. In this case even a stationary
incompressible flow affects r(x) for t -»• oo. What arises is the diffusive
dissipation; the fluid motion serves as an energy source.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

3.6. OSMOTIC PRESSURE
The form of the diffusion equation with inclusion of external forces
suggests that the diffusion itself can be interpreted as a motion under
kinetic pressure.
Indeed, the diffusive flux is given by
j=

-DVn.

Recall the Einstein relation D = Wk T and recast the diffusive flux as

j =nuD = n\

VkTn).

The combination kTn is nothing else but the pressure of an ideal gas of
temperature Tand concentration (particle number density) n.
The pressure produced by a substance dissolved in a liquid is usually
called the osmotic pressure.
Thus, consider a dissolved substance that exerts the pressure P only on
itself. Then the gradient of this pressure taken with an opposite sign,
—W, presents the force per unit volume acting on this substance.
When the concentration is n, the quantity —\/n VP is the force per
single particle of the dissolved substance:
1
F, = —V/>.
n

(11)

According to the definition of mobility, a particle under this force
acquires the velocity W¥t. Substituting W expressed through D, we

72

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

obtain the particle velocity u. Then relations

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

jD = nu,

du
— = -V}D
at

= DAn,

lead to the diffusion equation.
Thus, we have presented a mathematically correct procedure of
derivation of the diffusion equation based on the concept of osmotic
pressure. We would like the reader to feel how strange this derivation is!
Indeed, we have begun our discussion of the diffusion theory with the
presumption that the particles of the dissolved substance do not interact
with one another. Now we introduce the pressure determined by the
particle number density and the force determined by the gradient of the
pressure which acts on a given particle!
This approach is intrinsically contradictory but it cannot be ignored
since the result is correct. Notice that the pressure by itself is not
necessarily associated with interactions and collisions of molecules. This
can be seen already from the form of the expression of the ideal gas pres­
sure, P = nkT, which does not include the collisional cross-section.
For arbitrary velocity distribution the stress tensor of an ideal gas

^tt=5V">«,wMl;^

(12)

n

depends on particle velocities (momenta) rather than on their interac­
tions. Of course, an interaction of some kind is required in order to
transfer the pressure or a component of the stress tensor to a rigid wall.
The molecules must experience a repulsion force and rebound when they
hit a wall.
However, we emphasize again that the pressure inside a gas volume is
not associated with mutual interactions of the gas molecules. This
argument is in favour of the description of diffusion as a motion driven
by gradients of osmotic pressure.
But there is one more objection to the association between diffusion
and osmotic pressure. Employing the osmotic pressure concept, one
would say that all particles slowly move along some specific trajectories.

73

DIFFUSION

If, for instance, all particles were initially concentrated at
the origin at / = 0, then their trajectories correspond to the overall
expansion

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

X = Ayjt,

y = By[7,

Z = Cyft

(Fig. 3.5). Every particle is characterized by its own set of coefficients A,
B and C.
Is this picture adequate? The macroscopic density distribution that
follows from this motion law exactly coincides with both those calculated
from the diffusion equation and observed distributions. This can be
verified by evaluating the particle distribution over the coefficients A, B,
and Cat some moment t after the beginning of the motion (it is given by
n(t0) oc exp(-r2/2Dt0)) with r2 = (A2 + B2 + C2)t with subsequent
determination of particle positions and their number density at an
arbitrary moment. The result predicts that at the points, whose distances
from the origin are proportional to yft, i.e., equal to rQ(t/t0),/2 with
different values of r0, the density decreases as t~vl or inversely
proportional to the cube of the travelled distance.
X

14Fig. 3.5. Trajectories of particles according to the theory of osmotic pressure.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

74

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

If, however, we enumerate particles or mark them by different colours
and follow their motion individually, we would discover that they move
in an entirely different fashion. The particles which reside within a
certain small volume dxdydz initially at / = t0, (or, equivalently, have a
certain set of values of A, B and C) perform random walks. At any later
moment /, they do not travel to the corresponding small volume situated
(t/t0)u2 times farther from the origin. The particles travel to other
positions in the course of their chaotic motion along trajectories that are
far from being straight lines emerging from the origin. Any given volume
is filled with particles that originate from the volumes whose positions
are not related by the tl/2 law. Nevertheless, the density mysteriously
changes in exactly the same manner as predicted by the theory of smooth
motion under the action of osmotic pressure without allowance for
chaotic molecular collisions.d
In the theory of solutions, the osmotic pressure reveals another aspect.
Imagine a semipermeable membrane, i.e., a film that allows one
substance to pass through it (the solvent in our case, e.g., water) and for­
bids the penetration of another substance, e.g., dissolved sugar or salt
molecules.
Such membranes are by no means exotic novel high-technology
products. Various semipermeable membranes are common in living
organisms. Life, at least in multi-cellular organisms, would be impossible
without these membranes.
The membranes have an important property: if they selectively let
some substances in, they always let them out! Semipermeable mem­
branes are always open in both directions for a selected substance.
Thus, semipermeableness should not be understood as openness in one
direction and closeness in another direction, with respect to the same
substance.
Considering the mechanics of macroscopic bodies, one can easily
conceive a trough with plates shown in Fig. 3.6, devised in such a manner
that the balls rolling in one direction lift the plates, while the balls rolling
in the opposite direction hold the plates down and rebound.
Such a device of molecular scale is in principle impossible!
6

Allowance for molecular collisions together with osmotic pressure would amount to
accounting twice for the same effect!

DIFFUSION

I

(a)

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

(b)
Fig. 3.6. The construction of a trough which allows a ball to move to the right (a) but not to
the left (b).

If a membrane with one-way leak were possible, a gas could flow from a
vessel under lower pressure to a vessel under higher pressure. A
perpetuum mobile would then beautify our life. This would be the
perpetuum mobile of the second kind: when expending work on rotating a
turbine the gas would be cooled. Such engine would require a thermal
energy supply and the energy conservation law would not be violated.
However, such a device would violate the second law of thermodyna­
mics, the law of entropy growth.
Let us, however, return to a real physical experiment. The pheno­
menon of osmosis can be observed in an apparatus shown in Fig. 3.7
where a semipermeable membrane separates the vessel to the left filled
with a pure solvent from the vessel to the right filled with a solution. For
any initial levels of liquids in both vessels, liquid penetration through the
membrane leads to an equilibrium configuration.
In this equilibrium state, the liquid level is higher in the vessel that
contains a solution.
The pressure exerted on the membrane from the right is higher than
that from the left by the value of the osmotic pressure P0 = nkT, where n
is the concentration of the dissolved substance measured in molecules
per unit volume.
When the concentration C is measured in moles per litre and the
temperature is 0° centigrade (273 K), the osmotic pressure is equal to P0
= 22.4C atmospheres. The quantity, introduced simply for a more

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

76

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

Fig. 3.7. The measurement of osmotic pressure.

convenient description, materializes and can be measured directly with a
manometer or even with a rule from known liquid levels, densities and
the gravity acceleration. Fig. 3.8 illustrates how osmosis helps a plant to
absorb solutions from the soil by lifting them up.
The theory of osmosis commemorates many glorious achievements of
a physical chemistry. One of the classical results is that osmotic pressure
of a solution of the common salt, NaCl, is twice as large as predicted
based on its molecular weight, 23 + 35.5 = 58.5. This result* was
interpreted as an indication that in the solution every molecule of NaCl
dissociates into two ions, Na + and Cl~, each of which is surrounded by
several water molecules and moves independently; for this reason the
pressure is enhanced.

• We hope that the reader would not be surprised by the fractional molecular weight of
chlorine: it has two equally abundant isotopes.

DIFFUSION

77

§
CO

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

!

:«

Fig. 3.8. The osmotic pressure allows a plant to draw liquid from the soil.

The very notion of osmosis stems from a Greek word meaning "to
push". Molecules, atoms or ions that cannot penetrate a membrane
fiercely push it, thus producing an enhanced pressure.
This effect can be easily understood in the case of a gas mixture. If gas
A cannot penetrate a membrane and the vessel beyond the membrane is
evacuated, it is clear that the membrane experiences a pressure PA from
one side and zero pressure from another.
Let us add some gas B which can penetrate the membrane. Naturally,
in an equilibrium state the concentration and pressure of the gas B will be
the same on both sides of the membrane and only the molecules of B
passing in different directions coincide with each other.
The presence of A molecules on one side of the membrane has no effect
on this process. Therefore, the pressure on one side of the membrane
becomes PBand that on the other side is PB + PA. The pressure difference
remains as PA ■ This is the osmotic gas pressure. It is important to note
that mutual interactions of molecules are inessential in gases.
It is remarkable that a simple expression for osmotic pressure remains
valid for solutions where a dissolved substance strongly interacts with a
solvent.

78

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

3.7. ON REVERSIBILITY OF DIFFUSION IN TIME
In a thermodynamical sense, diffusion is irreversible in time: for a large
number of diffusing particles, this process leads to smoothing, with a
100% chance of inhomogeneities of particle distribution n(t) occurring.
At any earlier moment, the particle distribution inhomogeneity was
sharper.
However, it was noted by Schrodinger (1931) that the conclusion that
diffusion is irreversible is based on the presumptions that the initial state
of particles isfixedand that the particle distribution tends to a stationary
one for /-► oo. No presumptions about the behaviour of particles for
t -*■ — oo are usually made.
Schrodinger has shown that when diffusion occurs over a finite spatial
interval and the probability distribution tends to the same stationary and
ergotic distribution, both for t -* oo and t -* — oo (Schrodinger con­
sidered a uniform distribution), then over both the intervals — oo < / < t0
and / 0 < / < o o , the probability distributions evolve identically, i.e.,
diffusion turns out to be reversible in time.
This question was analyzed in detail by A. Kolmogorov (see Kolmogorov, 1986) and Yaglom (1949) for a general case of multidimensional
Brownian motion.
Let there be given the stationary probability distribution density p(x)
of a diffusion process and the probability/(f, x, y)dy of changing, during
the period /, the position from x to some point from the interval (y, y +
dy) such that /(/, x, y) -► p(x) for / -► oo. Knowing the position at the
moment we can determine the conditional probability density for the
initial distribution of position x, h(t, x, y). This function is uniquely
determined by the equality
h(t, x, y) p(y) = p(x)f(t, x, y).
In these terms, the problem of time-reversibility of diffusion is for­
mulated as the problem of finding the conditions under which the
equality h(t, x, y) = f(t, x, y) holds, if the function f(t, x, y) obeys both the
diffusion equation (the Fokker-Planck equation)
V
dt

Of
dx

d2f
dx2

DIFFUSION

79

o(v(y)f)
d2
^ILLl
+ —(D(y)f).

(14)

and the adjoint equation
df
J.
dt

dy

dy

The stationary distribution p(y) should obey the equation
,2

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

-2f+ —(Dp)
dy
dy2

=0

(15)

which follows from (14), and the obvious condition fp(y)dy = 1.
Based on these relations, Kolmogorov proved that for the reversibility
of diffusion it is necessary and sufficient that the condition
D'i/2~\n{D-"2p(x))
ox

v{x) =

is fulfilled.
Above, we have discussed molecular diffusion. The concept of
diffusion is also widely used in the problems of transfer of scalar or
vectorial quantities, e.g., admixtures, temperature, or magnetic field, by
hydrodynamic turbulent flows (see Chapter 7). Like the effects of the
chaotic molecular motion, the effect of the random small-scale flows is
approximately described as diffusion. Zeldovich (1982) discusses the
symmetry properties of the turbulent diffusivity under time reversal. In
the framework of a simple model of scalar transfer, the problem is solved
by expressing the turbulent diffusion coefficient D r i n terms of the
molecular diffusivity D:
/

tiv2

y/2

where v is the root-mean-square velocity, / is the correlation scale of the
turbulence and C, and C2 are constants of order unity. In the limit
D « Iv the commonly used expression DT = G Iv is recovered. Thus, the
turbulent diffusion coefficient has exactly the same symmetry properties
as the molecular diffusivity.

CHAPTER

FOUR

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

THE BROWNIAN MOTION

The Brownian motion often serves as a paradigm of randomness.
Unexpected turns of a particle path indicate the unpredictable character
of the acting forces. It can be seen that under the influence of random
kicks in a uniform isotropic medium, the Brownian particle would mark
time within some finite vicinity of its initial position. Actually, the
trajectories of a Brownian particle are very tangled and the mean value of
its coordinate is zero. But in the sense of the mean square, the particle
moves away from its initial position: the radius of the above-mentioned
vicinity grows with time. Studies of the Brownian motion have a very
interesting history commencing with a paper published by the botanist
Robert Brown FRS (1773-1858) in 1828 (Brown, 1828). Using a
microscope furnished with a lens of focal distance about 1 mm, Brown
discovered a continuous disordered motion of minuscule pollen parti­
cles. Being a devoted botanist, he checked if this motion is an expression
of life. Having tested glass and mineral particles, Brown rejected a
vitalistic origin of the motion but decided that he has discovered the
"active molecules". In reality, however, Brownian particles are subject to
kicks from a great number of molecules, and their behaviour is simply a
play of chance.
The Brownian motion is deeply investigated from the physical and
mathematical points of view as an example of stochastic processes.
In 1900, L. Bachelier (Bachelier, 1900) pointed out that the probability
distribution of a particle in Brownian motion is described by the
diffusion law. Physically transparent formulation and explanation of this
fact were given in 1905 and 1906 by A. Einstein, who proceeded from the
idea that the Brownian particle moves due to random, uncorrelated kicks
81

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

82

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

from many surrounding molecules. Independently and in simpler ways,
these concepts were developed by M. Smoluchowsky (1906).
The kind of motion discovered by Brown has found its place in many
fields of science, acquiring there various exotic forms which were very
different from the patterns observed by the English botanist. The use of
statistical distribution of Brownian particles to measure the integration
in the infinite-dimensional space has provided a basis for numerous
applications. The penetration of the Brownian motion is attributed to
P. Levi and N. Wiener. An idealized random trajectory of an individual
weightless particle is called the Wiener path. It has surprising properties being continuous and non-differentiable at every point. R. Feynman has
applied the functional approach to quantum mechanics and M. Katz has
done this in statistical physics. Brownian trajectories can be encountered,
often in a concealed form, in modern statistical radiophysics, turbulence
theory and magnetohydrodynamics.
The works of Einstein and Smoluchowsky were aimed at substantiat­
ing the molecular kinetic theory as an example of analysis in the
Brownian particle motion. When molecules bombard a sufficiently large
body, its averaged momentum is close to zero and the body is practically
at rest. The surface area of a Brownian particle is so small that random
kicks of molecules are not balanced and, in contrast to macroscopic
bodies, the particle moves. With the use of simple results of classical
diffusion theory, certain basic molecular characteristics can be deduced
by observing their motion. Chapter 2 is devoted to the classical theory of
diffusion. Our main goal in this chapter is to discuss, after having recalled
Einstein's description of the Brownian motion, more recent and more
complicated approaches to this motion, especially the Wiener paths and
the associated measure. Until now, many remarkable and constructive
results derived in this field by mathematicians have not penetrated the
daily practice of physicists. Our desire to build a bridge warrants our
simplified discussion which may embarass a high-brow mathematician.
Numerous applications of the concepts developed in this chapter are
found in other parts of the book in forms that are rather unexpected, e.g.,
the connection between the Brownian motion and a ball of lightning
(Chapter 5) or the role of the Wiener paths in the hydromagnetic dynamo
(Chapter 9).

THE BROWNIAN MOTION

83

4.1. EINSTEIN'S DESCRIPTION OF BROWNIAN MOTION
Let us denote the number density of pollen particles at the point x and a
time moment / as n(t, xf and the fraction of particles which shift from
point x to x + A in a short period T as <p(z, A). Then we have at the
moment t + x
00

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

n{t + T, x) = I n(t, x -A) (p(x, A) dA.

(1)

Particle conservation dictates that f^^pdA = 1. It is natural to expect
that the function q>{A) is symmetric, i.e., fpAdA = 0, and the probabili­
ties of large shifts are small, i.e., <p(A), and concentrated near the small
values of A. This allows us to expand the density in the Taylor series:

n(t,x-A)

dn
d2nA2
—AA +—= n(t,x) - —
+—
~~
2—
dx

dx 2

After substituting this expansion into (1) and performing the integration,
we transfer the first term to the left-hand side and keep only the first nonvanishing term on the right-hand side. Due to the smallness of T, we
obtain

dt

dx2

where we have introduced the notation D = ( 2 T ) " ' f<pA2dA (the diffusivity). Thus, the number density of pollen particles obeys the diffusion

* The problem can be formulated in another way: considering a single particle, n(x, t) can
be interpreted as the probability of the particle residing within the interval (x, x + dx) at
the moment /. When mutual interactions of particles can be neglected, as is implicity
presumed in Einstein's formulation, both formulations are equivalent.

84

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

equation. Following from (2), if initially the particles were concentrated
at the point x0, then at the moment t we have

1

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

n(t,x) =

[ (x - x0)2}
-expj-

° [.

(3)

This implies that the mean square of deviation of the Brownian path is
given by {(x - x0)2)y2 = (Dt)[/2.
It is interesting and instructive that the latter result follows from a
simple phenomenological argument (see, e.g., Gardiner, 1985). Consider
a particle of mass m and radius R whose motion is driven by disordered
kicks of surrounding molecules. Following Langevin, such motion can be
described by introducing the random force F uncorrelated to the particle
position: (xF) = 0. Newton's law yields
d2x
dx
m—-2 + 6nnR—- = F ,
dt
dt
where the Stokes friction force has been taken into account (rj is the
friction coefficient of particles against the medium). Multiplying this
equation by x, averaging, and taking into account that
(mx2/2) = NkT/2, where N is Avogadro's number, we obtain for large t

«"-^>",'(^'),"-(0'>"!-

(4>

where D = NkT/2>nr\R. Using the results of refined experiments, J.
Perrin (1924) has verified this relation (and similar ones) and confirmed
the value of Avogadro's number N = 6 "X 1023 which plays an exception­
ally important role in molecular physics and chemistry.
Notice that this seemingly simple "physical" reasoning is based on
implicit audacious presumptions. In particular, simultaneous employ­
ment of both the viscosity and random force concepts seems to be
unjustified. Friction in gases itself arises as a result of random forces. In a

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

THE BROWNIAN MOTION

85

rarefied gas (Knudsen's range of parameters), the Stokes formula
6nt]R{dx/dt) is inapplicable, while in a dense gas or in liquid molecular
kicks, it cannot be considered independent.
In contrast to this derivation, the diffusion approach given above is
based on solid ground.
Thus, the Brownian motion can be considered a random process whose
probability distribution is described by the diffusive Gaussian law. This
result clarifies both Einstein's approach which introduces the particle
number density and derives relations (l)-(3) and the expression of the
mean square deviation (4). However, there are possibilities to proceed
further and consider individual realisations (trajectories) of this random
process.
4.2 THE WIENER PATH
Let us denote w,(<y) as a random coordinate of a Brownian particle,
where t stands for time and the parameter a) specifies a particular
realization of the random process. For a given moment / = U, the
coordinate w,.((o) is a random quantity. For a given co, w, is a
deterministic function of t which is called the Wiener path.b This tribute
to N. Wiener explains why the coordinate is denoted so unusually, w„
instead of the more common x(t).
A random Wiener process is defined by the following properties:
Hfo(<y) = 0, w,(ft>) is the Gaussian process such that w,+t(<y) — w,((o) has
zero mean value and a variance T (see, e.g., a modern mathematical
discussion in Hida, 1980).
Thus, the mean value of the coordinate along a Wiener path vanishes
while its mean square grows proportionally to time. Since for a regular
motion, the mean square is proportional to the squared time, this
indicates that a path is highly irregular.
A Wiener path, being a trajectory of diffusion process, is continuous.
However, it is non-differentiable at any moment. Indeed, the probability
that \wl+/u - w,\ > CAt is given by the integral 2/£A/(27rA/)~l/2
b

To be pedantic, the path is, of course, a line described by the function w,.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

86

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

exp(— w2/2At)dw which tends to unity for At-*0. Thus, for any
constant C, the derivative dwjdt is almost certainly infinite at any
moment t. This result can be reached in the following less rigorous
manner. A typical value of the coordinate w, is roughly proportional to
ti/2. Therefore, Aw ~ (A/)'/2 for infinitesimal increments,0 rather than Aw
oc At, as required for the existence of common derivative. It is said that a
Wiener path has the derivative of the order 1/2. (For comparison, note
that in the Kolmogorovian turbulence for infinitely weak viscosity, the
velocity is proportional to lin, i.e., it has the spatial derivative of the
order 1/3.)
Saying that a path is typical, we imply that the exponential function in
the Gaussian probability distribution for w, significantly differs from
zero, for \w,\ *£ Ct,n. Actually, there is a small probability that w, acquires
an arbitrary large value, i.e., in a finite period t a path can get off to a dis­
tance proportional to t, or even formally arbitrarily farther. At first sight,
such hardly probable paths can be neglected. We show in Chapter 7,
however, that paths of this kind can produce a principal contribution to
advection of a scalar or vector admixture, thus giving rise to intermittency. Note also that the increment of the Wiener process principally
differs from the increment of, e.g., a deterministic function /(/) = ty2
near f = 0. At any moment the Brownian particle has, so to speak, a new
start and the increments are independent. Therefore, the derivative
dw/dt is infinite not only at / = 0 but also at any other moment.
c

Let us cite an exact form of the Wiener path for small periods, i.e., the recurrent logarithm
law established by A. Khinchin in 1933: for almost all realizations (almost all a>) and for
t -<■ 0, the upper and lower limits of the trajectory are given by
/
l\ l / 2
lim w, = I It In In - I
/
1\ 1/2
lim w, = —I 2/ In in—I
respectively. Note that the function In r ' enters these expressions. It is understood that
time is measured in units of the diffusion time L2/K, where L is the characteristic spatial
scale, e.g., the size of a vesselfilledwith Brownian particles. In dimensional units, In /"' is
replaced by In L2/Kt. An exact value of L is unnecessary for the description of the
trajectory at / -» 0 since |ln l\» In \L2/K\ for / -» 0.

THE BROWNIAN MOTION

87

Owing to the Gaussian character of the Wiener process, it is completely
determined by its correlation function. The latter can be determined
through averaging of the following obvious identity:
1

2

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

Taking into account that (w?) = t, {w]) = s, and ((w, - ws))2 = \t - s\ we
obtain
(w,ws) = min(t,s).

(5)

What follows is an important property of the Wiener path: the incre­
ments w,x, w,2 — wn,...,

w,n — wtm_x with tt < t2< ■.. <t„ are indepen­

dent since, according to (5), the average product of the increments
vanishes. An increment of the coordinate during the Brownian motion
over the period t2 — tt is completely independent of all events which
happened previously, at t < t{. In addition, it follows from (5) that — w, is
also a Wiener path. Obviously, the time stretching by a factor a is also ad­
missible with simultaneous renormalization of the coordinate, i.e.,
a~l/2 wat is also a Wiener path. The random process t w,_, is a Wiener path
as well.
The Wiener random process is non-stationary: in the period t, a
Brownian particle deviates by a distance of order tul in the sense of
mean-square deviation. In the course of such motion, it occasionally
returns to the origin in the one-dimensional case. In two dimensions, the
returns are very rare while in a three-dimensional case, the Wiener
process is not retraceable. These statements become obvious when we
recall that fundamental solutions (7, 23 of the diffusion equation in one,
two and three dimensions are given by

(*»>-"■«*(-£).

0")-'«P(-£).

88

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

and

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

««>-M«p(~)
respectively, where D is the difFusivity. The probability of return to a
small vicinity of the origin for t > t{ is given by J" GlXi{0, t)dt. This
integral diverges as a power-law on a line, as the logarithm on a plane and
converges in three dimensions. Therefore, for tt -*• oo, returns become
impossible in three dimensions.
To what extent does the Wiener path correspond to the motion of an
individual Brownian particle? The non-differentiability means that the
velocity is infinite at any point of a Wiener path. Hence, the acceleration
is also infinite. Therefore, the Wiener paths describe the motion of
particles with zero masses.
Indeed, let the mass of a Brownian particle be M and let it move under
kicks from molecules each of mass m. At the moment of every impact the
particle momentum abruptly changes, i.e., the velocity is described by a
step function, while the force and acceleration are <5-functions of time. In
the limit of vanishingly small molecular mass m and period T between
their impacts, the force is represented as a sum of a large number of
uncorrelated ^-functions with small coefficients. Then the velocity has
the Holder derivative of the order 1/2 and the trajectory, correspond­
ingly, has the derivative of the order of 3/2 (see Chapter 5). Next, when
the particle mass tends to zero, M -+ 0, the trajectory acquires the Holder
derivative 1/2, i.e., it becomes a Wiener process. The description of a
particle with non-zero mass and finite T can be accomplished using the
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process (see Section 4.6).
However, in some problems, e.g., in the analysis of diffusion of a scalar
or vector admixture in turbulence, it is more convenient to consider the
Wiener path as fictitious random paths. The real, physical meaning can
then be ascribed only to the result of averaging the set of all such paths.
The diffusing or spreading of a substance can be readily described in
these terms. This approach has an analogy in quantum mechanics, where
the wave function itself has no physical meaning and the physically
observable quantities are derived by averaging the squared modulus of

THE BROWNIAN MOTION

89

the wave function as a weight. Quite similarly, averaging over the Wiener
path requires knowledge of their statistical weight, or in mathematical
terms, the measure of Wiener process.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

4.3. AVERAGING OVER PATHS
Consider a Wiener path which begins from x0 = 0 at t0 = 0 and comes to
x = x(t) at the moment /. Dividing the time axis into intervals
0 < t{ < t2 < ... < t„ = t we obtain the finite-dimensional vector
w = w
n ( n' wa> ■ ■ ■ %i)- Independence of the increments, xi,x2 — xu . . .
and their Gaussian properties, imply that the distribution density of this
vector is equal to the product of the Gaussian densities for the individual
intervals:

"\U) h ~' U i • • • i tn ~ K- \\

=

X\, X2 — X\, . . . , X„ — X„_) )

7^expr^JVS^^expr^37)]

(6)

A continuous Wiener path is obtained in the limit of vanishing length of
the intervals when the vector w„, with n^-oo, becomes infinitedimensional. The corresponding limit of the distribution density (6)
yields the Wiener measure of the trajectory wt:

(7)

The measure (7) allows integration in infinite-dimensional functional
space, i.e., evaluation of ff(w)d[iw. In other words, the averaging of the

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

90

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

functionals F(w(t)) can be accomplished. The idea of averaging of
functionals with the Gaussian weights belongs to the French mathemati­
cian Levi (1972).
An outstanding contribution to the integration of functionals that
arises in problems of radiophysics and statistical mechanics is due to
Wiener (1958) who has formulated, in particular, the definition of the
measure (7).
Those who have never dealt with integration over an infinitedimensional functional space when evaluating the Wiener integrals could
feel uneasy with all these seemingly complicated, demanding and
number-decorated theorem procedures. Actually, in the Wiener integral
the things are much simpler.
In the preceding chapter, we have noted two approaches if interpret­
ing an integral. In the framework of Riemann's approach, an integral is
the area under the line y = f(x) and it can be calculated as follows.
Divide the x-axis into many intervals and construct rectangles elongated
along the y-axis whose combination approximates the considered area.
The sum of areas of all rectangles can be obtained without difficulty and
what remains is to take the limit for finer divisions of the Jt-axis. Another
understanding of an integral belongs to Lebesgue who proposed to divide
the y-axis rather than the abscissa. It would seem that the difference is
inessential. However, now we do not need detailed knowledge of the
properties of the x-axis (even when generalized to functional space), but
it is sufficient just to be able to calculate the areas over this axis.
We have employed Lebesgue's idea when evaluating the integrals over
such an abstract object as the space of elementary events. Let us now
apply this idea to evaluate an integral in which the integrand depends on
the functional variable. According to Lebesgue, all we should know is
how to calculate the area, or what is the measure over which the
integration in a functional space is carried out.
Let us recall how the area is understood on an ordinary plane. One
should introduce the unit of length and define the area of a simplest
object, e.g., a rectangle (the product of width and length). Next, the
considered planar object, of however complicated shape, is approximat­
ed by a set of rectangles which allows us to calculate directly the
approximate value of the area. What remains to be done is to decide what

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

THE BROWNIAN MOTION

91

the measure of a rectangle's counterpart is in the functional space and the
integrals over the functional space could be evaluated as easily as those
over a straight line. Mathematicians are often blamed for excessive
formalization, but appropriate formalization (Lebesgue's formalization
is of this very kind) is constructive!
But how should one understand a rectangle in a functional space?
In order to formulate this concept*1 note that physically the considered
integrals are averages of the functionals that depend on the trajectories of
a Wiener process. In other words, the integrands are trajectories of a
Wiener process. The "rectangles" should be some simple sets of these
functionals, and their measures should be the probabilities of the
trajectory of the Wiener process belonging to these sets.
To construct the desired sets, let us take the example of croquet, a game
that is so popular in England. Consider the horizontal plane on which the
various trajectories of the Wiener process are plotted with installed small
croquet arches (hoops) parallel to the axis x = W. The set of hoops is
determined by the moments /, to which they correspond and by the
coordinates of their left-hand and right-hand ends of the arches, a, and &,
(see Fig. 4.1). The "rectangle" in the functional space, usually called the
quasi-interval, is simply the set of functions whose plots pass through all
the hoops, while the measure of the quasi-interval is denned as a
probability that the trajectory of a Wiener process passes through the
hoops, i.e., belonging to the quasi-interval. The specific positions of the
hoops can be arbitrary, provided only that their number is finite. This is
the very physical definition of the measure of a quasi-interval, or the
Wiener measure, that is required for the practical evaluation of the
Wiener integrals. Of course, the measure of the quasi-interval can be
calculated explicitly, as was done in the derivation of expressions (6) and
(7):
d

The simplest procedure that comes to mind is to expand the functions into Fourier series
and regard it as belonging to a cube in a functional space with those functions whose
Fourier coefficients belong to the interval (0, a). The value a then would be the side of the
cube. However, it would be a non-rigorous extension of finite-dimensional concepts to an
infinite-dimensional space. Indeed, the volume of such an A'-dimensional cube is
VN = a".LelN-» oo.Fora> 1 we have VN — co, while VN-» Ofora < 1. It is clear that a
reasonable definition of the measure cannot be formulated this way.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

92

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

Fig. 4.1. The quasi-interval is formed by those continuous functions whose plots fit within
wickets shown here.

= \dx\\
a,

o2-a,

d{x2-xx)...\

d(x„-xn-l)
<"«-"»-!

*V\ i h ~ U > K ~ tn- 1 '■> X], X2 ~ Xt . . . X„ — Xn- | ) .

We notice that this is an integral variant of the expression (7).
4.4. THE WIENER AND FEYNMAN INTEGRALS
In the discussion above, we have intentionally hidden a subtlety which
leads to many difficulties in quantum mechanics. Lebesgue's recipe for
the construction of the measure' requires the possibility of using not only
e

This is one of numerous examples of discoveries which are unrecognized and underesti­
mated by their authors: for one-dimensional integration Lebesgue's measure represents
purely mathematical importance; its principal physical importance was discovered in
connection with functional integration.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

THE BROWNIAN MOTION

93

finite but also infinite sets of rectangles approximating the considered
geometric figure (more precisely, they are countable sets of rectangles). In
turn, this requires the possibility of performing the following operation.
It should be possible to divide any rectangle into a countable number of
non-intersecting rectangles and the measure of the original rectangle
should be equal to the sum of the measures of smaller rectangles (this pro­
perty is known as denumerative additivity of the measure). It can be
easily verified that the Wiener measure (7) obeys this requirement which
is due to rapid decrease of exponential functions in (7) for the growing se­
paration between the points Xj and JC,-_,.
In quantum mechanics, Feynman's approach employs the averages
over quantum wanderings rather than the averages over the Wiener
paths. Formally, transition from a latter path to the quantum path
consists in the replacement of / by it (compare the diffusion equation
with the Schrodinger equation) but, as a result, the exponential functions
in (7) cease to decay at infinity, and Lebesgue's approach becomes
inapplicable. What is obtained then is another measure which has much
weaker properties and is known as the Jordan measure. This measure
does not ensure the existence (convergence) of the Feynman integrals
used in quantum mechanics. In simpler terms, when using a Feynman
integral, one can never be sure that it converges until it is calculated out
as a certain finite number. In the case of Wiener integrals considered
here, we are free from this difficulty: their convergence can be verified as
easily as that of an ordinary one-dimensional integral. This is the very
difficulty which is meant by mathematicians when they say that the
functional integration is not sufficiently substantiated.
The typical functionals encountered in these applications are of the
power-law or the exponential form. For example, in quantum mechanics,
the transition amplitude (whose square is the probability) for transition
from the point x 0 tox n is given by the integral over the trajectories
connecting these points:

K(x0,xn) = je,s^dfi\
where the functional S is known as the action. This is essentially the inte-

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

94

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

gral over time from /0 to /„ of the Lagrange function (Feynman and Hibbs,
1965).
A pure mathematician would be satisfied by pointing out that the
Wiener integral is a correctly defined quantity. For a physicist, it is
principally important to know whether he can calculate this integral to
obtain the desired numerical estimates of observable quantities. Let us
illustrate this procedure in the simplest case where the functional under
an integral sign is a constant, say, unity. Any Wiener integral can be
calculated in two different ways. The Wiener integral can be understood
as an average or mathematical expectation M over the Wiener paths.
Then, of course,
Ml = 1.
On the other hand, the Wiener integral can be understood as the limit of
the iterated integral over the measure (7). Divide the time interval into N
periods of the length A;. Then

\ldnw = lim
— I ...
exp 1 — V ——
J
* - » (7rAf)l/2 J
J
I £i
At
— cc

— \ dxx...
J

dxN.
N

—QO

By transformation of variables yi+l = xl+l — xh the iterated integral
reduces to the product of ordinary integrals of the type

=

'- ^/

exp

{-£k

(8

»

— CC

All of them are equal to unity. We see again that the considered Wiener
integral is equal to unity. This result has a more fundamental meaning
than that which is evidenced in the simple example. The integral of unity
is, of course, equal to the total volume (or area, or the measure) of the
considered space. Thus, the measure of the total space of paths is equal to
unity.
A similar calculation can also be done for Feynman's quantum
integrals. In this case, suitable normalization of the measure by a

THE BROWNIAN MOTION

95

constant A also gives unity in the result. However, not only the rapidly
converging integrals of the type (8) are calculated at every step, but also
the integrals

A~h{f}dy-

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

h=

These integrals of rapidly oscillating functions also converge, but this
convergence is only conditional and the result of calculation depends on
the way of summation. This fact underlines again that the Feynman
measure is much less productive than the Wiener measure (in formal
terms, the former is not denumeratively additive and the integration
region cannot be divided into a countable set of sub-regions during the
calculation).
The difiiculties associated with the definition of Feynman's integral
are objective, rather than due to the laziness of mathematicians. Neverthe­
less, physicists have used these integrals widely and successfully. No less
useful are the Riemann integrals that also are not based on denumerati­
vely additive measure. Moreover, the physical mind is not dissatisfied
with using not only conditionally convergent integrals but even integrals
that have sense only as generalized functions. In all such cases, the
difficulty is a consistent definition of the measure. This is avoided by
considering only certain restricted class of integrands specific for every
particular considered case. This is exemplified by Feynman's integrals
that lead to quite reasonable results in known applications. Thus, there is
some inadequacy of mathematical foundations which consists in the
necessity to isolate and describe a reasonable class of integrable func­
tional, rather than in the formulation of the theory of measures.
Other Wiener integrals can be calculated similarly to the calculation of
the integral of unity stated above. The reader can find these results in the
review of Gelfand and Yaglom (1956). However, we do not consider it
important to enlarge the number of examples where the Wiener integrals
can be calculated explicitly. It is more important to find out whether
there are problems which can be easily solved in terms of continual
integrals but are hard nuts to crack for other approaches. When the
language of continual integration was being developed, the answer to this

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

96

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

question was not clear. On the one hand, Feynman's idea has allowed a
deeper understanding of the least action principle. In particular, physi­
cists disguised earlier the fact that trajectories of motion provide the
minimum of action only at small time intervals, while at larger periods
they correspond only to the stationary points of the action functional.
(For a function of a single variable, y(x), the necessary condition for the
extremum is the vanishing of the derivative, y' = 0. For the functionals,
the corresponding condition is the vanishing of the variation, i.e., the
Euler equations. The sufficient condition for a minimum is a positive
value of the second derivative at the stationary point, y" > 0. The similar
condition for the action functional is the so-called restricted Legendre
condition, i.e., a positive value of the second derivative of the Lagrangian
with respect to velocities; usually this condition is fulfilled automatically.
However, in order to ensure a minimum of a functional, it is required to
fulfill also the so-called Jacobi condition whose meaning reduces to the
requirement for all possible trajectories, as described by the Euler
equations for various initial velocities, not to intersect in the course of
evolution of the system. Therefore, for a pendulum, the action is minimal
only during periods not exceeding the oscillation period.) For the
Feynman integrals, the action is stationary when the phase of the
integrand is stationary. Those trajectories which correspond to the nonstationary action strongly interfere to attenuate the resultant contribu­
tion to the integral. Thus, the least action principle (or, more exactly, the
stationary action principle) can be interpreted as the quasi-classical
approximation for Feynman integrals. It turns out that there is no
necessity to check a formidable condition of minimal action. We may see
how sagacious was the Ukranian philosopher Grigory Skovoroda
(1722-1794) who wrote that unnecessaries are difficult and necessaries
are easy.
Now the apparatus of continual integration has become a working
instrument in many fields. In Chapters 8 and 9, we will discuss some
examples of physical problems where the solutions can be easily obtained
with the help of Wiener integrals but are hardly accessible with other
methods which would lead to cumbersome and unconvincing arguments.
One more aspect of calculations of Wiener integrals in the numerical
approach is of special interest. Integrals extending along straight lines
were already known to Archimedes, who had learned the integration of

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

THE BROWNIAN MOTION

97

certain power-law functions. However, Archimedes could not have
known such a powerful tool as the Newton-Leibniz formula that allows
the reduction of definite integrals to indefinite ones. Far from it that all
integrals can be evaluated analytically with this method; nevertheless, the
desired result can be obtained in many very important cases. Without
this method, Archimedes' calculation of even the simplest integrals
becomes a complicated and tedious undertaking. The computer era has
turned matters upside down; with computers, calculations of practically
any integral along a straight line is an elementary problem. Had
Archimedes been a contemporary of von Neumann and Turing, this so
useful and usual analysis of Newton and Leibniz could never have
appeared. Meanwhile, the numerical calculation of derivatives is by far
more complicated than integration. The necessity to calculate ratios of
small numbers leads to tremendous loss of accuracy which must be taken
care of by, e.g., least-squares interpolation.
The Wiener integral can be also calculated numerically. The pioneer­
ing results in this direction are due to Cameron (1951). The most
convenient approach considers the integral as an average over the Wiener
measure rather than as a limit of an iterated integral. It is sufficient to
consider three dozen typical Wiener paths and calculate the average over
them - the central limit theorem guarantees that the result approximates
the Wiener integral. Basically, this is the same idea as that of the MonteCarlo method. As always, reality is not so benevolent. First, the
construction of the Wiener paths requires generators of random
numbers. Any software package contains something called a generator of
random (more exactly, pseudo-random) numbers. Computational
mathematicians have proposed many beautiful algorithms for such
generators but the very formulation of the problem is intrinsically
contradictory: a rigid sequence of operations, e.g., an algorithm, is
expected to give something random. Of course, the situation is not
desperate. The onset of chaos from order in strange attractors is now well
studied, even if it is not completely understood, and widely used in
programming the generators of random numbers. However, a lighthearted "first come, first served" approach to the choice of the algorithm
can lead to impressive results. An algorithm which is useful in a certain
class of problems may work absolutely unsatisfactorily in other cases. For
instance, some algorithms that produce good samples of points randomly

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

98

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

distributed along a line cannot be generalized to the three-dimensional
case because they produce clusters around some planes or more compli­
cated surfaces (see Fig. 4.2).
Another difficulty in the numerical calculations of Wiener integrals is
associated with the fact that some of them are determined by unlikely
events, by non-typical paths. Such situations are considered in Chapter 8.
A similar difficulty is also known for ordinary integrals of rapidly
oscillating functions. Special methods should be applied to them but the
problem does not seem to be unsolvable.
These two kinds of difficulties are actually intrinsically connected: the
more exotic the paths that make principal contributions to the Wiener
integral, the tougher are the requirements that arise for the reproduction
of these paths, i.e., eventually, for the used random numbers generator.
Notwithstanding these difficulties, the simplest Wiener (and Feynman)
integrals are within the reach of modern numerical methods.

Fig. 4.2. A pseudo-random numbers generator, which satisfactorily produces random
sequences x„ on a line, can yield characteristic structures on the plane when these numbers
are combined into pairs x = x2„, y = JC2„+ i • This example refers to a standard generator of
pseudo-random numbers FARN which is provided with many software packages. This
illustration of its disadvantage has been published by Maximov (1986) in one of the Soviet
popular journals which regularly discuss software for microcomputers. It was reported in
one of the subsequent issues that omission of some of the generated numbers, e.g., the
choice between x = xin and y = jrM„+0, removes this correlation (Salzmann, 1987).
Similar difficulties are mentioned by Jones (1988).

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

THE BROWNIAN MOTION

99

Discussing the justification of these methods, we inevitably touch
upon a remarkable and surprising peculiarity of computational mathe­
matics. This field of science is genetically connected with pure mathema­
tics, the science which exists in the name of rigorous proof. In modern
computational mathematics, however, even if only in some cases,
irreproachable mathematical proofs can be given. They prove to be
almost useless after a deeper analysis. As a result, modern computational
mathematics is unexpectedly close to experimental physics in the nature
of its arguments; in both cases, the principal instrument of verification is
experimentation, either in a laboratory or numerical. Let us clarify this
by the following example. When computing an ordinary integral, one
replaces the integrand by a polygonal line or by using a more precise
Simpson's parabolic rule. One should know how many mesh points must
be taken in order to reach the desired accuracy. This problem was solved
long ago theoretically and all calculus textbooks give the theorem with
their corresponding estimates. The proof can be made as rigorous as
possible for theorems of calculus. However, the result itself is practically
useless. At least, nobody thinks of incorporating it into standard
software. The reason for this is simple: the derived estimate of the
required fineness of the mess depends on the maximum derivative of the
integrand. For other interpolations, even higher derivatives are involved.
The computation of these is much more complicated than the computa­
tion of an integral. Therefore, instead of this rigorously proved estimate,
the so-called Runge's empirical estimate is usually applied, which is
based on the presumption that the result of the computations is close to
the true value of the integral when the doubling of the number of meshpoints does not lead to a considerable change in the result. This estimate
cannot be proved while the examples that directly contradict it can be
given explicitly. Nevertheless, in the hands of a judicious person, this
empirical estimate gives excellent results.
4.5. THE WHITE NOISE
The force F(/) that appears in Section 4.1 is a random, rapidly varying
function with zero average value, (F(/)) = 0. Thus, the particle momen­
tum is also zero on average. Suppose that the force is constant over time
intervals of length At and its values in these periods are independent. Let

100

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

At tend to zero. In order to transmit the finite r.m.s. momentum to a
Brownian particle, the force should be proportional to (A/) _1/2 . Then for
any two moments t and /', the mean of the product F(t) F(t') vanishes if
\t — t'\> At and is infinitely large if t = V (as dictated by the finiteness of
the transmitted r.m.s. momentum). A compact expression of this has the
form

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

(¥(t)F(t'))

= S(t-t'),

(9)

where the force amplitude is taken to be unity for convenience. The
correlation function (9) has a flat Fourier spectrum since
CO

/

(F(t) F(t + s)) e\p{-i(os}ds

= 1

A random process with a spectrum of the correlation function which is
flat and independent of the frequency a> is usually called a white noise.
All frequencies are equally represented in such a process.
Of course, the white noise can never be realized in nature because a real
random process always has a non-vanishing characteristic correlation
time (memory) t. However, the correlation function (9) serves as a very
convenient mathematical idealization of a process whose memory is
short (as compared with all other characteristic times). More exactly, this
is the limit of a short-correlated process for T -* 0. This limiting process
proves to be directly connected with the Wiener process.
To elucidate this connection, consider the integral of the random force,
i.e., the momentum n(t) = /{, F(s)ds. Due to non-correlation of the force
at the moment t and that at V > t, the quantities n(t) and n(t') — n(t) are
statistically independent. In addition,

F{s)ds ) = 0
)

(JF(s)ds
»0

j F(u)du)
0

= j
'

0

j (F(s)F(u))duds = V - t.
0

THE BROWNIAN MOTION

101

Thus, the momentum has all the properties of the Wiener path, and hence

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

F(0 = - ^ .

(10)

Thus, the white noise is the derivative of the Wiener process. But w,
does not have an ordinary derivative. Therefore, the relation (10) has
only a symbolic, generalized meaning. In other words, explicit operations
with the process F(t) and the equations which include it are meaningless.
Meaningful are the average value and the correlation function of the
white noise. The corresponding equations must be understood only in the
integral sense. Nevertheless, Langevin and his followers, including the
most high-brow mathematicians, use explicitly the white noise and
differential equation with it, agreeing with the symbolic meaning of the
corresponding procedures and appreciating their brevity and conven­
ience.
The probability distribution of the white noise is Gaussian, as well as
the measure of the Wiener process. This fact can be perceived intuitively
starting from the following property of Gaussian distributions. If the sum
of two independent random quantities is Gaussian, both of them are also
Gaussian (see, e.g., Hida, 1980). The reverse statement is not only true
but can even be very easily verified with the use of the explicit expression
for the Gaussian distribution.

4.6. THE ORNSTEIN-UHLENBECK PROCESS
Let us note a more smooth random process as compared with the Wiener
process. This process has a finite correlation time and a steady distribu­
tion, in contrast to the Wiener process whose trajectories with probability
one eventually go away to infinity.
The Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process v, is given by the solution of the
stochastic Langevin equation with the white noise as random force,
dv,

v,

dvt,

- ' = - - + <7l/2-^.
dt
x
dt

(11)

102

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

By integration one obtains
v, = \0e-"x + am

I expj - — \dws.

(12)

0

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

For constant (or normally distributed) v0 the process is Gaussian with the
expectation value and dispersion as follows:
(v,) = v0 exp

4

o = (v, - (v,))2 = y ( l - e x p { - ^ } ) •
For / -► oo, these characteristics tend to zero and ax/2, respectively. The
latter values determine the abovementioned steady Gaussian distribu­
tion. The correlation function can also be deduced directly from (12). For
large t and s and for finite difference t — s,it is given by

<»/»,)= y exp I-J-—1J.

(13)

Note that in this limiting case the correlation function depends only on
the time lag |; — s\. Such processes are called stationary. We see that the
values of v are considerably correlated only at the moments / and 5 that
are separated no larger than T; the latter has the meaning of the
correlation time. For t-*0, the function (13) vanishes for all / and s
except fort = s when it reduces to the delta function provided a = T" 2 .
In this sense, the Wiener process can be considered as the limiting case of
the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process under decreasing correlation time.

CHAPTER

FIVE

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

FRACTALS AND DIMENSIONS

In the preceding pages, the reader has already encountered the mathema­
tical concepts (e.g., the Lebesgue integral) beyond the scope of university
courses for physicists. We cannot say that these concepts are more
complicated than the traditional ones: an integration after Lebesgue is
not more difficult than that after Riemann. These concepts were not only
required for solving problems which physicists faced a few decades ago
but they also provide clearness in solving many modern problems. In the
following chapters, we continue to employ modern mathematical phy­
sics. The crucial moment which changed the physical and mathematical
consciousness and marked the beginning of wide acceptance of these
novel ideas was when Mandelbrot (1977) published his book in which
many facts of traditional mathematics were exposed at a novel, clear and
constructive level. These ideas were not properly comprehended by
mathematicians, nor were they known to physicists, but lay collecting
dust in libraries. The ideas wandered from one textbook to another in the
role of mathematical subtleties, inaccessible to uninitiated scholars.
Nowadays, these ideas should become a working tool for physicists.
Ignorance of the motion of a fractal will soon be considered as equal to a
lack of skill in differentiation or integration.
This chapter is devoted to fractals and fractional dimensions.
5.1. HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
"Geometricians say that the line is a length without width; and we
sceptics, cannot conceive a length lacking width, neither in perception
nor in speculation" (Sextus Empiricus, Against the Physicists, 1,
103

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

104

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

390-391). Even in ancient times (the quotation refers to 2nd century
BC), people felt that the concept of dimensionality as inevitably an
integer is restricted. Step by step, the concept of an object which is more
voluminous than a line but still akin to a line, was being formed (a line
having width). Very significantly, for a long period of time, this work of
thought was wrapped in negative forms, i.e., in the forms of criticism of
the concepts of one- and two-dimensional objects. This attitude develops
vividly in the above quotation from Sextus Empiricus.
The concept of a line has played a decisive role in the formulation of
analytical geometry. One of the branches of this field is represented by
differential geometry. This line of thought goes beyond the analysis of
lines and surfaces in our native and dear three-dimensional space. The
development of differential geometry has led to the concepts of curved,
non-Eulerian space which can be of many dimensions and of a curved
complex of space and time.
Probably, yet a more important role in the development of science was
played by calculus — differential and integral. However queer the forms
acquired by some formal and abstract definitions of derivatives and
integrals, the discovery of these ideas is intrinsically associated with the
concepts of motions and curves (the derivative identified as a velocity or
a slope and the integral as distance or area). It is important to note that
what was meant here were smooth motions and curves. It is hardly
probable that Newton and Leibnitz could arrive at the idea of a
derivative if Brownian motion had been studied, i.e., velocities and
trajectories of microscopic particles in thermal motion.
Newton, Leibnitz and many others right up to L. Euler took for granted
the smoothness and existence of derivatives. This suppression was not
passed on to the following generations. Textbooks have been filled by
phrases like "derivative, provided it exists... ". Like road signs warning
a driver, these reservations have a deep meaning. It can be argued at
which stage of education that such reservations and complications
should be introduced. The successful development of the so-called nonstandard analysis (Cartier, 1984; Shubin and Zvonkin, 1984), which uses
freely the idea of infinitely large and infinitely small members, has
revealed how this criticism sometimes carried too far and shows that the
theory of limits can be exposed more closely to the approaches of Newton
and Leibnitz than is usually done. Nevertheless, the very fact of the

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

FRACTALS AND DIMENSIONS

105

existence of unsmooth functions and related objects is not being called
into question.
In the second half of the 19th century, K. Weierstrauss and G. Peano
proposed examples of functions which are continuous and none­
theless have no derivatives and of curves which densely fill a square
everywhere. From a modern viewpoint, properties of these objects seem
strange because they are considered one-dimensional while it is more
natural to endow such objects with higher dimensionalities, including
fractional ones. Modern terminology calls them fractals. This prelimi­
nary stage of study of fractals was unconstructive. Their connections with
physics and other possible applications were not appreciated and the very
term "fractal" appeared relatively recently. The contemporaries often
interpreted the activity of the critics as destruction of mathematics; thus,
Ch. Hermite wrote to T. Stieltjes in 1893 that he "turned away in fear and
horror from this lamentable plague of functions with no derivatives"
(Hermite, 1905). The following generation of critical-minded mathema­
ticians have analyzed equally intently the very foundations of their
science — the concepts of the set, the natural number, the proof, etc. The
reaction to this attack was expressed by D. Hilbert (1925) who hoped that
nobody could expel us from the paradise created by Cantor.
The positive and constructive exploration of non-classical objects and
situations was started by a theoretical physicist, P.A.M. Dirac, who was
not a mathematician and was working in another field. His idea of delta
function has made a tremendous impression for both mathematicians
and physicists. His work has resulted in the reconsideration of the results
of critical direction aimed at the formulation of useful, constructive
ideas. Mentioning the influence of Dirac's work on the development of
the theory of fractals, we mean primarily his conceptual influence, the
change of scientific atmosphere. The point is that the concept of
dimension belongs to the kind of everlasting problems of science which
are reconsidered again and again in every new scientific era and for
which changes of attitudes and approaches are no less important than the
solution of a new particular important problem.
From the viewpoint of modern science, a function which lacks a
derivative is far from being simply an abstract notion insidiously
mentioned at any calculus examination: it is a trajectory of the Brownian
particle. Due to its extremely ragged shape, such a trajectory should be

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

106

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

considered as a "thick" line, or a fractal. As we shall see below, the very
description of fractals is very much similar to the example of nowheredifferentiable function given by Weierstrass. It turns out that Weierstrass
unconsciously had at hand the concept of the fractal! The arsenal of
mathematics has provided an analytical apparatus suitable for describing
such unsmooth objects. The notion of dimensionality is extended to
fractional dimensions introduced by Hausdorff (1918) while the deriva­
tive is generalized by the so-called Holder index, or the fractional
derivative (this concept is due to the work of many mathematicians).
The idea of fractional dimensions is based on the analysis of the
concept of integer dimensions. We easily understand what it means when
we hear that a line or a circumstance is one-dimensional, a plane or
spherical surface is two-dimensional, and a space or solid sphere is threedimensional, etc. Roughly speaking, this means that the position of a
point on a line is described by a single coordinate, that on a plane by two,
and that in space is characterized by three numbers. A quantity such as
the number of coordinates, of course, cannot be fractional. The introduc­
tion of fractional dimensions requires two steps: firstly, to make certain
that the traditional understanding of dimensions is incomplete, in such a
way that endorsement of fractional dimensions to some object would be a
remedy; secondly, a certain definition of dimension must be given that
allows for fractional values (Zeldovich and Sokoloff, 1985).
This plan can be accomplished as follows. One-dimensional objects are
associated with length, two-dimensional ones with area, and threedimensional with volume. The corresponding combinations of units of
measuring dimensions (similar roots are not accidental in these words)
are cm, cm2 and cm3, respectively. Experience with other fields of physics
tells us that dimensions can involve fractional exponents. For instance,
the dimension of an electric charge" in cgs is g 1 ' 2 cm 3 ' 2 s _ l . In order to
implement such fractional dimensions into the fractal theory, the notion
of coordinate should be considered in a somewhat broader sense. A point
* Of course, these fractional exponents should not be considered as an indication of the
fractal nature of electric charge: in the natural system of units (ft = c = G = 1) the
dimension of the electric charge has integer exponents (Synge, 1960, Appendix B)
([e] = sec). Nevertheless, there exist certain physical objects whose dimensions have
fractional exponents in the natural system of units; all known objects of this kind are frac­
tals (Barenblatt and Zeldovich, 1971).

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

FRACTALS AND DIMENSIONS

107

inside a square can be characterized to any given precision by one
coordinate, rather than by two, provided the corresponding coordinate
linefillsthe square sufficiently densely. Actually, coordinates of this kind
are far from exotic. For instance, the address of a townsman could, in
principle, have the form of geographical longitude and latitude of his
apartment, or even his bed. However, we choose another way of
indicating the street, the house and apartment number; these are similar
to the integer and fractional parts of the coordinates. In principle, all
apartments could be labelled with consecutive numbers (the address
system in Tokyo and the ZIP code system closely approach this idea).
Now the question about the dimensionality of a town does not seem to be
casuistical: when considered as combinations of streets, towns are onedimensional; as regions on the surface of the earth, they are twodimensional; recalling that houses can have elevators we would say that
the relevant number is three. But can the true dimension be fractional? In
other words, how should a town be characterized — by the total length of
the streets (a sum of the first powers of lengths of small street segments
separated by crossroads), or by its area (a sum of squared lengths of the
abovementioned segments in towns of rectangular lay-out), or by any
other powers of these lengths, e.g., three halves, dictated by a particular
question of interest or a particular kind of town? The answer to this
question is discussed in detail at the end of Section 5.2.
A difficulty with the idea of fractional dimension, as well as with the
integer dimension, is due to the non-uniqueness of the way of its intro­
duction discussed in the last two paragraphs. Other approaches can be
proposed, which are equally natural but lead to other results. In the next
section we begin our discussion with another approach which is less
familiar to physicists but was proposed earlier than the others. This
approach, proposed by Hausdorff, is based, in fact, on ideas formulated
already by Euclid. The essence of this approach is the recognition that
one- and two-dimensional objects are essentially parts of a threedimensional space whose one or two dimensions are very small.
To conclude this historical introduction, we should mention two basic
ideas associated with the concept of fractals. When discussing a ragged
and unsmooth trajectory of the Brownian particle and the corresponding
infinitely large acceleration, we understand that this is an idealization.
On a very small scale finiteness of the particle mass and of the time

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

108

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

between collisions become essential and the trajectory's smoothness is
recovered. When discussing a physical fractal surface, we visualize it as a
rough surface where the height of irregularity slowly decreases with
decreasing area of its projection. However, these irregularities should be
much bigger than interatomic distances; otherwise the very notion of the
body surface would be inapplicable. When describing how a long
molecule fills a three-dimensional volume (the corresponding mathema­
tical object is known as the Peano curve), we understand that beginning
with a certain degree of filling up, we should take into account not only
the linear dimension of the molecule but also its thickness and our
description of a tangled curve becomes inapplicable. Therefore, the
concept of fractals is generically associated with the concept of inter­
mediate asymptotics (Barenblatt and Zeldovich, 1976; Barenblatt, 1978):
the size of irregularities is small but still much larger than a certain
smallest scale.
The second idea can be classified using a rough surface as an example.
Imagine a surface with two or more families of irregularities whose base
areas are the same but for the height probability distributions. On the
other hand it is also conceivable that the surfaces are irregular only in the
narrow vicinity of some point. It is clear that both these cases cannot be
described by a single number or even by a fractional dimension. The
notion of fractals is based on the presumption that forbids such
situations: the corresponding spectral expansions should have random
phases of individual terms. Analysis of these situations requires either an
independent investigation, as in the theory of delta function, or an
introduction of the hierarchy of dimensionalities corresponding to every
subsystem of irregularities (see Section 5.6 below).
We would like to mention that the era that gave birth to the theory of
fractals (19th century) was followed by the era of criticism in mathema­
tics (20th century) when many other strange objects were discovered. In
contrast to fractals, these still have no applications. These are such
monsters as the extraordinary sets whose elements are they themselves,
non-Aristotlean logics, intuitional mathematical analysis, etc. Possibly,
they will eventually find their places in physics. The reader who wishes to
ponder over this theme is referred to Fraenkel and Bar-Hillel (1958), one
of the rare monographs in this field whose language is accessible to nonspecialists.

FRACTALS AND DIMENSIONS

109

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

5.2. FRACTALS: THICK LINES
Let us examine the working edge of a razor blade under a microscope,
tuning the latter to finer and finer resolutions. To the naked eye the edge
seems to be smooth; increasing the resolution, we see irregularities and
notches. Further, they seem larger, and finally a crystallic structure is
seen. We enter the quantum world are the edge can no longer be precisely
defined. The concept of the fractal is devised for the description of the
intermediate range when the edge loses its smoothness but the interatomic
level of the resolution is still far away (Fig. 5.1).
We have already mentioned that one of the first concrete mathematical
examples of fractals was given by Weierstrass (1886): a function without
a derivative. This function has one-to-one correspondence with the xaxis and is given by the series

Fig. 5.1. A fractal curve has a self-similar structure over a wide range of scales.

110

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

y(x) = ^ A" cos (B"nx),
n-0

where O < A < 1 and the product AB is sufficiently large (Weierstrass
chose AB > 1 + 3/2 while a more natural condition AB > 1 was estab­
lished by Hardy (1916)). It is convenient to consider from the beginning a
more general form,

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

00

K x ) = X a ( * n ) cos (*„* + ?,,),

(1)

n-0

where a(Kn) oc K~a, Kn ~ n -* oo.
Weierstrass' example can be easily recovered from (1) for the vanishing
phases <pn and partial summation. It is well known (see, e.g., Zygmund,
1965) that the decay rate of the Fourier spectrum, i.e., the value of a, is
related to the number of derivatives of the function y(x). Indeed, termby-term differentiation of the series (1) yields
— 1 y(x) = £ a(Kn)(K„Y cos (Knx + <pn).
ax
7?o
Convergence of the original series requires a„ oc K~" with a > 0. It is
clear that the series for they-th derivative converges when a >j.
It is important to note that the arguments below are based on the
random phase approximation, i.e., they are applicable only to typical
representatives of the class of functions that can be written as
y(x) = X a(Kn) cos (Knx + <pn),
n-0

where (pn is the sequence of independent random numbers uniformly
distributed between 0 and 2n. Some functions decrease their spectra
gradually due to the unsmoothness at a single point. For instance, delta
function has a flat spectrum, a(K) = const., while for the step function
a(K) = aUK; these functions have irregularities only at the origin.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

FRACTALS AND DIMENSIONS

111

Meanwhile, fractal curves have a structure such that, statistically, all
their points have the same properties. Note also that K„ and n are not
equal but only of the same order of magnitude. In other words, it is
important that, together with the phases, the frequencies of the harmon­
ics are also uncorrelated. Otherwise, for small values of a (specifically,
a < 1/2) the plot y(x) can acquire randomly distributed infinitely high
peaks. To illustrate these subtleties, consider as example the function
y = I"_, sin(nx)/na with a < l / 2 and 0^x<2n.
Firstly, phases of
different harmonics, nx, are equal (and thus, completely correlated).
Secondly, K„ = n for this function. Due to these facts, behaviour of this
function is dominated by two peaks at x = 0 and at x = 2n: firstly, the
integral Sl'y2(x)dx diverges; secondly, the series can be shown to
converge uniformly (and, thus, the function is continuous) everywhere
except at the points where sin(;c/2) = 0; however, we see that y = 0 at
these very points, e.g., x = 0 and x = In. The only possibility is the
presence of singularities in the vicinity of the points JC = 0 and x = 2n.
In modern terms, the principal part of Weierstrass' paper consists in
verifying the fact that the function constructed by him is typical, or in
other words, generic. However, the very notion of generic properties was
formulated more recently, after Cantor proposed his theory of sets. This
notion has made a significant impact on the value of mathematical
labour: in the 19th century people spent years proving that, say, the
number n is irrational while now we are usually quite satisfied by
observation that practically all numbers are irrational.
Thus, it follows from the theory of trigonometric series that for
0 < a < 1 the function y(x) given by (1) is continuous but non-differentiable. The plot of this function is a fractal line. For 1 < a < 2 the "path"
y = y(x) is smooth but the corresponding velocity is not smooth at every
point, i.e., it has fractal properties. Only those functions have all nonfractal derivatives (like the functions (1 + .x 2 ) - ' or exp(—x2)) whose
spectrum a(K) decays faster than any degree of A" (e.g., as exp(—A") or
exp(-A-2)).
All the results formulated above are negative because the ideas of
calculus have only restricted applicability to functions with slowly
decaying spectra. The introduction of the Holder index allows to cast the
results in a positive form and say that the function y(x) given by (1) has
smaller-than-one derivative, specifically the a derivatives. For the

112

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

/

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

/

Fig. 5.2. The structure of smooth and fractal curves in the vicinity of some point (a): a
smooth curve has a tangent line (dashed); (b): a fractal curve has a curvilinear cone
Ay — |Ax|° as the tangent (dashed).

common derivative we have, by definition
Ay = /*Ax.
For our function we have (see Fig. 5.2)

Ay = n„(Axr,

(2)

where n and nH are the ordinary and Holder derivatives, respectively.
More exactly, for AA; < 0 and Ax > 0 the left-hand and right-hand
derivatives, fiH_ and ^w+ respectively, should be introduced. After this,
manipulations with the function y(x) of (1) become nearly as easy as with
smooth functions.
Two examples of physical objects with deficient smoothness are widely
known. One of them is the Wiener process, i.e., mathematical idealiza­
tion of the Brownian motion (see Chapter 4) with the particle mass and
the time between collisions tending to zero. In this limiting case, the
particle experiences an acceleration of the delta-function type at any
moment and the correlator of the Wiener process has a flat spectrum. A
sum of many instantaneous kicks produces the displacement wl+dt — w,
= wdl = dw, ~ (A01/2, i.e., the corresponding Holder index is 1/2: the
Brownian particle trajectory has half a derivative. Ito (1946) has

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

FRACTALS AND DIMENSIONS

113

proposed a remarkable formula for the evaluation of the differential of a
smooth function of the Weiner stochastic process, F[w,). The differential
dF, i.e., the increment with accuracy up to dt, is given by
dF = F'dw, + (l/2)F"(dw,)2 rather than F'dw,. It is the second term in
Ito's formula which formally allows the development of an alternative
description of diffusion (after Langevin-Smoluchowsky-Wiener), not
based on the diffusion equation but later arriving at expressions of the
Kac-Feynman type for solutions of evolutionary equations through the
Wiener integrals (or the Feynman integrals in quantum mechanics). This
method and its applications to the description of heat conduction and
diffusion will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 8.
Another example is provided by the Kolmogorovian turbulence. If we
neglect viscosity that becomes essential at small scales, turbulent
pulsations of the velocity field are of the order Sv ~ {Sr)xn. This implies
that although the Kolmogorovian velocity field is continuous, it has only
1/3 of the spatial derivative. Here the physical object has a more
complicated nature: this is an unsmooth vector field.
Let us now calculate the dimensionalities of fractal curves which were
discussed above. After Hausdorff, the fractional dimension of a set of
points can be determined as follows. Surround every point of the set by a
circle of small radius e and calculate the area of the combination of all
circles, S(s) (in fact, for any given e a finite number of circles would suf­
fice). When some circles overlap, the area shared by two or more circles is
counted only once. The rate of decrease of S(e) with e determines the
dimension. Indeed, for a smooth curve S(e) ~ eL, L being the curve
length. When the curve degenerates into a point, we have S(e) ~ e2. In the
other limiting case, when the considered set occupies part of a plane,
S(e) ~ e°, since the number of circles declines as s~2.
For the fractal curve (1), the covering area is estimated in the following
way (Fig. 5.3). For the wave vector K = e~\ individual periods of the
sinusoid find room within the circles of the radius e. If the coefficients
a(K„) decrease with e (remember that K„ ~ e~') slower than e for e -+ 0,
the width of the circle band is of the order of a(e~l) rather than e. If, in
contrast, a(e~') = 0(e), then the circle band can manage to follow all the
bands of the curve, which is smooth in this case. Thus, for a < 1, the
dominant contribution to the area of combined circles come from those
harmonics which have K„ ~ e"'. Let the length of the projection of the

114

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

v*)

Fig. 5.3. Definition of the external dimension of a fractal curve: In the fractal case the
width of the curve vicinity is determined not by the radius of the circle but by the
magnitiude of bendings of the curve.

considered segment of the x-axis be of the order of unity. The combina­
tion of all circles has area S(e)~a(e~i) ~ef. For 0 < a < 1 the area
decreases with e slower than for a smooth curve and the corresponding
fractal curve is intermediate between a line and a surface. Hausdorff has
proposed a definition according to which the dimension of such an object
is given by
dimexl y = 2 - a.

(3)

The subscript "ext", which is an abbreviated "external", indicates that
when measunng this quantity we have penetrated outside the curve itself
and y symbolizes the considered curve.
A serious shortcoming of the discussion above is the exceptional role of
the x-axis. It can be easily modified to make all axes equivalent. This is
reached through a parametric description of the curve y, i.e.,
x = ^ a(Kn) cos (K„t + <p,„)
n-0

FRACTALS AND DIMENSIONS

y=^b(K„)

115

cos (Knt + <pln).

Both directions are equivalent when the coefficients a and b decay
similarly:

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

a~b~lCna,

0<«<1.

Estimation of the area of £-vicinity of y in two dimensions again yields
ea (rather than e2a since now one should consider the deviations of
irregularities from a certain average position). We again obtain
dimexly = 2 - a.
There is another approach to the definition of the fractal dimension of
a line which is based only on its properties intrinsically associated with
the curve itself rather than on the orientation of the curve y on the plane.
This approach was already mentioned in Section 5.1. Let us introduce the
parameter / that varies along the curve y. Divide the /-axis into intervals
of length e and calculate the length of y taking into account only those
bands in which t has an increment no less than e. The total length of such
segments is of the order of a(e~')(l/e) ~ e"~' and tends to infinity with
decreasing e. We stress that this kind of analysis relies only on the
possibility of measurement of a distance along the curve for a certain
range of t, rather than the degree of tangleness of the curve.
It is worthwhile to ponder over the fact obtained above of the
divergence of the length with decreasing e. Assume that we have made an
error in the preliminary estimation of the dimensionality of the consi­
dered object while actually we have at hand not a line but a part of a plane
and now we attempt to parametrize a two-dimensional region with a
single parameter. Of course, such parametrization is very unfortunate:
the coordinate curves more and more, densely filling the region with selfcrossings producing a kind of lattice (Fig. 5.4). The transverse period of
the lattice is ~ e while the number of cells is ~ e~2. The total sum of
lengths of the broken line segments is ~ ee~ 2 -«• oo. This sum diverges
and here this only means that the region is two-dimensional and one
should consider its area rather than its length, i.e., up-squared segment
lengths rather than the lengths themselves.

116

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

^

Fig. 5.4. Definition of the internal dimension of a fractal curve: Segments of the broken
line, which densely cover the plane, are small but very numerous. The sum of the squared
lengths of the segments is finite.

In the case of fractional dimension, the line is so tortuous that the sum
of its elementary lengths is infinite and to obtain a finite result, one
should sum up their fractional powers rather than the first or second
ones. The resulting sum is finite (of course, if the initial guess of the
dimension is correct) when this fractional exponent is I/a. The dimen­
sion of this sum is cm1/2 and the number 1/2 itself represents dimension­
ality. Thus, the internal dimension of a line can be naturally defined as
1
dimint y = - .
a

(4)

Of course, this definition is valid for lines embedded in space of any
dimensionality.
The external dimension of planar fractal curves vary from 1 to 2 (the
dimension of a plane), while the internal dimensions range from unity to
infinity. These two dimensions coincide only in the trivial case of smooth
lines. Evidently, every specific physical problem requires the use of a
properly chosen kind of fractal dimension. For instance, in the problem
of absorption by a thin tangled thread, one estimates the number of
atoms that can find place in its vicinity, i.e., the external dimension is
relevant. However, where the thread weight is concerned, the internal
dimension is of importance.

FRACTALS AND DIMENSIONS

117

Let us calculate the external dimension of a line specified by (1) which
is embedded in three-dimensional space. In this case
CO

x, = ^ a,{K„) cos (Knt + tp,„), a.(K) ~ KT°.
n-0

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

Estimation of the volume of e-vicinity of the line clearly yields V(e) ~ e2".
By analogy with the two-dimensional case, we have
dimeit y = 3 - 2a.

(5)

for three dimensions. For m dimensions
dimexl y = m — (m — \)a.
Hence, the external dimension of a fractal line lies between the
dimension of the smooth line and the dimension of its surrounding space,
while the internal dimension is between the smooth line dimension and
infinity.
5.3. FRACTALS: THICK SURFACES
The definition of the fractal dimension of a rough surface can be
introduced in a similar way. Let the surface <f> be specified parametrically
by

Ku Kv
1-1,2,3

a,~\K\-".
Since now we have a double Fourier series, its sum is finite when a
exceeds unity. Therefore, in the considered fractal range 0 < a < 1, the

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

118

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

double series diverges in an ordinary sense and it can be summed up only
in the principal value sense. In other words, the harmonics should be
summed up within a finite sphere first and then summation in radii
should be accomplished.
Let us divide the parameter space («, v) into triangles of diameter e.
Division into squares is easier to interpret but division of into triangles
(triangulation) is technically more feasible since, in contrast to a square, a
triangle is a rigid figure, i.e., it is uniquely determined by the lengths of its
sides.
Now we proceed to the calculation of the total sum of the areas of the
triangles that approximate the surface. Again we take into account only
those harmonics whose wavelengths are not shorter than e. This sum is of
the order of [a(e~l)(\/e)]2(l/^) and for 0 < a < l it diverges with
decreasing e. The sum becomes finite when 1/a powers of areas are
summed up and the surface dimension is given by
2
dimint<D = - ,
a

0<«<1.

(6)

As for the external dimension, it is given, after Hausdorff, by
dimext <D = 3 - 2, 0 < a < 1 ,

(7)

since the volume of e- vicinity of the surface is of the order of a(e~'Xl/e).
The fact that external and internal dimensions of fractal objects do not
coincide implies that, in contrast to regular multiple differentiable
objects, for fractals the link between internal and external characteristics
is broken. In other words, in the case of a regular surface, the curvature
can be calculated by two methods: either with the help of the Riemann
curvature tensor, as is done in general relativity theory or with the help of
curvatures of cross-sections, and both results coincide. Meanwhile, for
fractal surfaces, the results would generally differ. It is remarkable that
such "fractal" behaviour is also typical of smooth but irregular surfaces,
i.e., surfaces that have tangent planes but not higher derivatives, even
though the dimension of such surfaces is exactly two. This interesting
phenomenon, discovered by the American mathematician J. Nash, leads

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

FRACTALS AND DIMENSIONS

119

to curious situations. Consider first a regular surface of area 5". For a
closed surface, it is natural to expect that the volume enclosed by the sur­
face is of the order of Si/2. Of course, the numerical factor depends on the
particular shape of the surface and on the distribution of the Gaussian
curvature, but the order of magnitude is correct. Nash (1954) has
discovered that when the surface smoothness or the number of Holder
derivatives is between 1 and 2 (i.e., when its external curvature still
cannot be evaluated through the usual formulae), its surface area is not
connected with the enclosed volume: a crumpled sphere (with preserved
metric, i.e., when distances between all points can be measured along the
surface) of arbitrarily large surface area can be placed within an
arbitrarily small sphere. According to modern estimates, the exact
threshold smoothness at which this phenomenon appears lies between
1.07 and 1.7 (Bakelman et al., 1974). Nash's surfaces demonstrate the
effect anticipated by the Czech writer Jaroslav Hasek who puts into his
character's mouth the conjecture that, inside the earth, there is another
sphere, much larger than the outer one. The simplest conception of
dimension is widely used in biology for the explanation of the propor­
tions of various creatures like corals or sponges. It would be interesting to
find out the species that demonstrate the properties associated with
Nash's character of their bodies.
5.4. FRACTALS: A FOAMY SPACE-TIME
The concept of internal dimension can be extended without significant
modifications to curved spaces, e.g., the general relativity (of course, in
this case the space should be divided not into triangles but into their fourdimensional counterparts - simplexes). If on microscopic scales the
space-time resembles a foam, as suggested by Wheeler (1962), then the
dimensionality to a macroscopic observer can differ considerably from
that observed microscopically. This and other related problems are still
poorly investigated by mathematicians but some estimates can already
be done.
Cosmology frequently invokes the so-called flat spectrum of perturba­
tions in which all harmonics of the density perturbation in the Friedmann cosmological model have equal probability. Clearly, such a flat
spectrum can be considered only as an intermediate asymptotic regime.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

120

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

Initially, this spectrum was proposed as a convenient reasonable assump­
tion in the absence of more definite information (Zeldovich and
Novikov, 1967). However, it became clear recently that the so-called
inflation theory leads to a cosmological model with Euclidean comoving
space and flat spectrum of density perturbations (Starobinsky, 1982;
Halliwell and Hawking, 1985). In this case the curvature also has a flat
spectrum. This means that in the scale range of the intermediate
asymptotic, the comoving space dimension is not exactly three but
slightly larger.
At a later stage of evolution the fractal properties of the space are lost.
The cellular structure that arises from this (Shandarin and Zeldovich,
1984) is structured matter distribution rather than structured space. Of
course, Einstein's equation predicts that singularities of the metric arise
at positions where matter density diverges due to the presence of the
cellular structure. These singularities are similar to those arising when
two non-coaxial cylinders intersect (Zeldovich et al., 1977). However, the
spectral expansion of such a metric is strongly phased rather than fractal.
The multi-dimensional Nash surfaces have new interesting properties.
When the dimensionality of the surrounding space is sufficiently large,
surfaces can possess Nash's properties even if it is differentiable
arbitrarily many times (Nash, 1956). For the four-dimensional surfaces,
the threshold dimension of the enveloping space, corresponding to the
appearance of such crumpled surfaces, lies somewhere between 11 and
29 (Gromov, 1970). In this connection, it is proper to recall multi­
dimensional generalizations of the field theory of the Kaluza-Klein type,
which are believed to be far from the theory of fractals. In these models
the micro-scale dimension of space is larger than the macroscale
dimensionality because some dimensions turn out to be periodic
coordinates whose period is infinitesimal. Another interpretation of this
reduction of dimensionality at macro scales was also proposed (Joseph,
1962). In multi-dimensional space-time, potential can be introduced
which is similar to the potential that confines quarks within a nucleon but
prevents the existence of free particles outside a four-dimensional spacetime surface rather than the existence of free quarks. This picture implies
a certain connection between the external and internal properties of
surfaces: the volume of the vicinity of a surface should be of the order of
VN/n where V is the ^-dimensional volume of the surface, n is its

FRACTALS AND DIMENSIONS

121

dimension and N is the enveloping space dimension. It seems that the
presence of Nash's crumpled surfaces in the enveloping space would
make this picture impossible, i.e., the dimension of the enveloping space
exceeds the value between 11 and 29. The lower bound of this interval is
in intriguing closeness to the dimension of the enveloping space
predicted by the particle theory (Cremmer et ai, 1978).

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

5.5. FRACTALS: CONTOUR LINES
The initial approach to the concept of fractals in physics was associated
with a striking example - measurement of the Great Britain coastline
length. Recall that the coastline can be introduced as the solution to the
equation h(x, y) = 0, where h(x, y) is the height above sea level.
It turned out that the larger the scale of map used, the longer the
coastline. The coastline turns out to be a fractal whose measurement
requires the introduction of a "quasi-length" of the dimension of
centimeter raised to a certain power. Although specialists are well aware
of these circumstances, the practice of cartography still neglects it. As an
example, we mention that the administration of the National Park of
Lithuania publishes the area, depth and coastline length of the Park's
lakes. The last can hardly be reasonably defined (even though easily
determined by ignorants); meanwhile, the lakes' diameters are not cited
although this quantity can be defined consistently. Of course, the length
of the coastline can be used in practice but necessarily with reference to
the corresponding scale, which requirement is rarely observed.
The definition of fractals which was introduced above does not exactly
correspond to this classical problem. The point is that detailed inspection
of the coastlines reveals the system of skerries which add many relatively
shorter segments to the total coastline length.
In contrast, the considered parametric fractal objects can have selfintersections (e.g., two-dimensional trajectories of the Brownian type).
Meanwhile, the contour lines have no self-intersections with probability
unity because the conditions for simultaneous vanishing of a random
function and its gradient, required for contour line self-intersection, lead
to an over-determined system of equations.
In order to determine the fractal dimension of the contour line of a ran­
dom function, one should find out how many Holder derivatives it has.

122

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

This number, a, depends on the behaviour of the spatial correlator at
small distances. For a smooth random field,
(<p(x)<p{x + t)) =

l-Ar2

for r-*0, while for a fractal field
<fl»(x)p(x + r ) ) =

\-Ar".

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

The fractal dimensionality of the contour line is given by the index a.
5.6. FRACTALS: DENSE POINT SET
All examples of fractals considered above have no small dimensionality.
The objects of dimensionality, say, 10~' arise when one considers a set of
a large (infinitely large in the limiting case) number of points that densely
fill the fractal object. In order to determine the Hausdorff dimensionality
of such planar fractal, every point should be surrounded by a circle of the
radius e, the area of the combination of all circles should be calculated,
and its dependence on e should be determined. Such fractals have been
known for a long time in mathematics and exemplified, e.g., by the
Cantor setb (an example of a set that is unconnected everywhere and has
the power of continuum). However, such objects did not seem to be more
than the fruits of mathematicians' mind games. Now we know that sets
similar to the Cantor set are attracting sets (strange attractors) of
dynamic systems (see Section 5.8); the set of zeros of one-dimensional
Wiener process is also fractal (of dimensionality 1/2). Recently, fractal
objects of this type were proposed for the description of intermittency in
turbulence (Frisch, 1983; Parisi, 1984). We have already mentioned that
in the Kolmogorov turbulence the velocity is continuous but has only 1/3
derivative. This fact can be expressed graphically as follows. Let us plot
along the abscissa the number a of derivatives of the velocity field, and
b

By construction, the Cantor set is the following. Divide the unit-length interval into three
parts and discard the middle one. Repeat this procedure with every sub-interval. The
limiting set that arises after an infinite number of steps is called the Cantor set. It consists
of points rather than of intervals.

FRACTALS AND DIMENSIONS

123

along the ordinate the Hausdorff dimensionality d=dexl of that set of
points at which the velocity has the given number of derivatives
(Fig. 5.5). Then for the Kolmogorov turbulence we have

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

d{o) = ldy-X-

+ cj),

where 6(x) is unity for x > 0 and zero for x < 0. Thus, for a < 1/3 the pre­
scribed differentiability is observed almost everywhere, while for a > 1/3
such differentiability can be found practically nowhere. The function
d{a) of this form corresponds to the Gaussian velocity field, i.e., to
absence of intermittency.

Fig. 5.5. The schematic structure of level lines of a random function. Dashed lines mark the
parts below "sea level". The island structure, "skerries", are visible.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

124

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

When there are coherent structures present in a turbulence and it is
essentially non-Gaussian, it can be expected that the value of the function
d{a) continuously changes from three to zero (Frisch, 1983). Practically,
it is more convenient to measure in an experiment a certain relation for
variations of higher velocity moments with its distance and its order
(Parisi, 1984). Such measurements made by Anselmet et al. (1984) have
allowed us to determine the function d(p) for a real turbulence shown in
Fig. 5.6. Accuracy of this determination is still rather low but some
deviations from Gaussian properties are clearly seen. Qualitatively, this
plot implies that the velocity field has 1/10 derivative practically
everywhere and 9/10 derivative almost nowhere; for intermediate orders
there occurs a smooth change of dimensionality of the set of points where
the velocity field has a given smoothness.
5.7. FRACTALS AND SELF-SIMILARITY
Fractals play a very important role in modern physics but, of course, even
the simplest processes cannot be completely characterized solely by a
quantity of fractal dimension. One can easily find examples when the
determination of the fractal dimensionality does not introduce anything
new to our understanding of a phenomenon. It seems important to
understand in which kind of problems fractal dimensionality is informa­
tive. Unusual statistical symmetry of a system is an indication of the
importance of fractal dimensionality. Consider, for instance, a dense set

Fig. 5.6. Intermittent turbulence can be characterized by the fractional dimension. The
dashed line shows the dimension characteristic of the Kolmogorov turbulence; the solid line
refers to the real turbulence.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

FRACTALS AND DIMENSIONS

125

of points with fractal properties, the so-called fractal cluster. In this case
statistical symmetry can be understood as follows. Let us construct
around every point of the cluster identical surfaces (e.g., equal spheres)
whose size is considerably larger than the size of the points (the particles)
but considerably smaller than the cluster size (the condition of inter­
mediate asymptotics). Then the property of self-similarity implies that
the number of points (or, the cluster mass or fraction, which is the same)
are the same on average within every sphere and proportional to a certain
power of the sphere radius. Such fractal clusters are exemplified,
probably, by a globular lightning (Smirnov, 1986). At any rate, these
fractal clusters are single objects that would provide a light weight and
rigid structure for the active matter in the globular lightning. Within a
globular lightning the air is heated and convective flows take place. The
whole cluster structure can be considered as a system of pipes and the lift
force produced by convection can be evaluated similarly to that
produced by smoke moving above a chimney (Zeldovich, 1937). The
detailed structure of the fractal cluster that forms a globular lightning is
still unclear. If the cluster is produced by sucessive addition of individual
particles in Brownian motion, its external Hausdorff dimensionality is
approximately 2.46 (Smirnov, 1986). In this case this external dimen­
sionality is of primary interest since it characterizes the relation between
an empty space and the volume filled by active matter. A similar cluster
in two dimensions has the dimension of about 1.71. In particular, selfsimilarity implies that the overall shape of the cluster is nearly isotropic.
Similar ideas work also in elementary particle physics, particularly in
the description of the multiple particle production. The process of
multiple particle production of hadrons is considered as the production
of a large number of partons, i.e., quarks and gluons, with their
subsequent combination into hadrons. In some approximate descrip­
tions, development of this process is represented as the Brownian motion
of partons between the positions where the particles are formed. Quite
naturally, the opening angle b of the diffraction cone that results is
proportional to the number of steps of the process of multiple particle
production, i.e., to the average multiplicity of particles, n:
b~n.

126

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

Such dependence is not observed in experiments, which can be explained
by the interaction between partons or by their rescattering. This makes
the diffusion of partons more complicated and their diagrams resemble
fractal trees n with many branchings. Here the most relevant characteris­
tic of a fractal is its internal dimension which reflects a complexity of
parton evolution, the tangled pattern of the diagrams. It can be shown
(I.M. Sokolov, 1986) that in this case

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

b~

n2/iimM',

where diminI TT is the internal dimension of the fractal n. An experiment
confirms this power-law dependence to first approximation and gives
(Dremin, 1987)
dim i n t ff*7.5,
which indicates that parton diagrams are highly tangled (note that dimint
7t considerably exceeds the dimensionality of surrounded three-dimen­
sional space).
The role of self-similarity in the theory of fractals is so important that
many early works in this field (see, e.g., Barenblatt, 1978) base the very
definition of fractal dimensionality on the concept of self-similarity.
Now such an approach seems to be an exaggeration; the Hausdorff
dimension exists for many non-self-similar objects as well, even if its role
is not so prominent in such cases.
As we repeatedly noted in this chapter, the fractal, or fractional
dimensionality, is not a single concept but rather a group of related
concepts. In various fields of science, various aspects of fractal dimen­
sionality appear relevant. We illustrate this in detail using as example the
application of fractal dimensionality to strange attractors which are used
in modern physics as simple models of turbulence. This application will
be useful for our discussion in Chapter 6.
5.8.

STRANGE ATTRACTORS

This section and the following one are devoted to a particularly
interesting example of fractal which bears an unusual name, the strange

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

FRACTALS AND DIMENSIONS

127

attractor (Ruelle and Takens, 1970). This fractal is useful for the
description of chaotic behaviour of trajectories of some deterministic
dynamic systems.
It is well known that the state of a dynamic system can be completely
specified by positions and velocities, or (x, x) in symbolic vectorial
representation. The set of these quantities forms the phase space. The
temporal evolution of the system is described by a certain trajectory in
the phase space. The concepts of the phase space and phase trajectory
were proposed and effectively used by Gibbs in statistical mechanics, by
Poincare in the theory of differential equations and by Birkhoff in the
theory of dynamic systems.
According to a classical theorem (see, e.g., Nemytsky and Stepanov,
1952), through every point of the phase space (x, x) of a system, for
which
dxt
~d=f'lxj)>

i",./'= 1 . 2 , . . . , AT

with continuous derivatives dfJdXj on the right-hand side, can pass only
one trajectory of the system. Two or more trajectories can only approach
asymptotically (be attracted to) for / -»• oo a certain point, line, or another
set which is called the attractor.
For instance, the phase plane of an undamped linear oscillator0
x, = x2;

x2 = — kxi — <y2x,

is covered by elliptic trajectories that correspond to particular values of
the energy E = x\/2 + a>2x]/2. In order to place the system on a given
ellipse, the corresponding initial conditions (x,(0), x2(0)) should be
prescribed. In the presence of dissipation, X > 0, the energy is not
conserved and every trajectory becomes a spiral converging to a single
equilibrium point (0,0), which is an attractor of zero dimensionality.
The damping of oscillations can be prevented by proper supply of energy.
In a grandfather's clock for example, such supply is accomplished
e

Physicists are more used to another form of description of the oscillator:
x + Ax + afx = 0. We put x = xx, and x — x2 ■

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

128

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

through the potential energy of a weight and the ratchet. The phase
portrait of such a nonlinear oscillatory system features a special line or
limit cycle which all trajectories approach. This is a classical attractor of
dimensionality one discovered by A. Poincare and was introduced into a
theory of oscillations by A. Andronov (1929), an outstanding Soviet
scientist who worked in Gorky for a long time and has created there his
scientific school.
The revival of widespread interest in phase portraits of dynamical
systems occurred in the sixties because of the problem of convection
considered in a meteorological context. Studying the problem of convec­
tion, B. Saltzman (1962) has proposed and analyzed a finite-dimensional
system of equations that described convection. He discovered that in
some cases all components of the solution, apart from a certain three,
decay in time while those three experience irregular undamped oscilla­
tions. Having properly appreciated this fact, E. Lorenz (1963) proposed
the system of only three equations (two velocity components and the
temperature deviation). Varying the principal parameter of the system
(the Rayleigh number), he revealed that, apart from the static solutions
and regular oscillations (which correspond to convective rolls of regular
shape), the system possesses also non-periodic solutions of irregular and
stochastic character. This result was quite unexpected because the Lorenz
system looks rather simple:
x = a(y — x), y = —y + Rx — xz,

z = — bz + xy.

(9)

Lorenz has revealed the irregular undamped solutions for b = 8/3,
a = 10 and R = 28. It was shown later that "stochasticity" arises in a
certain order rather than a wide range of parameters (see the review of
Gaponov and Rabinovich, 1979). For instance, system (9) was consi­
dered as a model of global activity of the Sun for a -*■ 1 and large R (of the
order of (a- l)" 1 ) (Ruzmaikin, 1981).
For the values of b and a chosen by Lorenz, the behaviour of the system
in the phase space (x, y, z) is as follows (see details in Afraimovich et ai,
1977; D. Yorke and E. Yorke, 1979). For R < 1 only the static solution
(0,0,0) is stable. For R > 1, three stationary solutions exist, (0,0, 0) and
(±[b(Rl)] l / 2 , ±[b(R- l)] l / 2 , R~ 1), i.e., the origin and two
symmetrically situated points at the height z = R — 1. For R< Rt =

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

FRACTALS AND DIMENSIONS

129

13.926 all trajectories converge to one of these fixed points while for
R> R, there exists an infinite number of periodic trajectories and
irregular, turbulent trajectories that do not converge to any fixed point or
periodic trajectory. For R> R2 = 24.74, all three fixed points are
unstable and for R = 28, a stable chaotic regime is observed (for R *£ 50)
in which the trajectories are attracted to a certain manifold in the phase
space.
The global properties of a dynamic system can be obtained when there
is a bundle of trajectories. Such a bundle can be prescribed by a smooth
initial distribution of points in the phase space and one may follow the
evolution of its shape in the course of approach to the attractor (Fig. 5.7).

Fig. 5.7. Evolution of the distribution of particles at the strange attractor in phase space:
initially the particles are distributed in clumps (a) but with time their distribution becomes
more and more resolved (b, c).

130

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

Since divergence of the vector field determined by the system (9) is
negative,

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

dx
dy
dz
— + -j- + — = -(a + b + 1),
dx
dy
dz
the attractor must have a zero measure (zero volume). On the other hand,
the attractor asymptotically includes all trajectories that correspond to
complicated three-dimensional motions. The basic rough characteristic
of such unusual manifold is the dimensionality, which takes fractional
values for strange attractors. This characteristic allows us to envisage the
geometric image of the attractor; for instance, the Lorenz attractor has
the dimension 2.09 (see the following section) and is, therefore, similar
only to a curved "thick" surface.
The attractor dimension also has another dynamic aspect (Eckman and
Ruelle, 1985). Physicists are used to the language of modes, e.g., the
Fourier modes, or to the spectral language. The simplest harmonic
oscillatory system is the linear oscillator. The growing complexity of a
system is interpreted as the growth of the number of excited oscillators
(modes). Any arbitrarily complicated linear dynamical system can be
represented as a sum of an infinite number of such modes.
However, this language can hardly be effective in the description of
essentially nonlinear systems, e.g., the chaotic regime of the Lorenz
system. Of course, any individual trajectory is exactly determined by the
initial conditions (x0, y0, z0) and can be expanded into a Fourier series.
However, another trajectory that is initially very close to the former one
normally has a completely different set of modes. It is the instability, or
the exponential divergence of neighbouring trajectories, which gives rise
to stochasticity and which introduces drastic difference to the spectra of
individual trajectories. The situation resembles one which is encountered
in statistical mechanics. The methods of statistical mechanics can be
used for the study of a system that contains as few as three equations
(Lucke, 1976). One can only wonder how L. Boltzmann, J.C. Maxwell
and J. Loschmidt, who thought of random dynamics for a system of
3 X 6 1023 equations, consider this situation?!
The dimension of the strange attractor can be interpreted as the
effective number of dynamic variables (dynamic modes) in the system. In

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

FRACTALS AND DIMENSIONS

131

this sense, it is said that the systems with strange attractors, i.e., with in­
trinsically stochastic dynamics, are low-modals. This idea can be of
paramount importance for the problem of hydrodynamic turbulence. If it
could be shown that a turbulent system has an attractor of finite
dimensionality, this would give the number of basic modes that
determines the flow properties and a simple description of turbulence
would be possible. At any rate, according to Ruelle and Takens (1970),
the transition from the laminar state to the turbulent one occurs through
the excitation of a small number of modes. The earlier scenario of
Landau and Hopf considers the excitation of an infinite number of
modes (Landau and Lifshitz, 1959).
5.9. MEASURING THE ATTRACTOR DIMENSION
As in the case of any other fractal object, the dimension of an attractor
can be determined, in principle, geometrically by covering it with the
elementary cubes or spheres whose size is e and whose dimension
coincides with that of the phase space. The minimal number of cubes
grows as e~d for e-+0 and the quantity d is called the external, or
HausdorfF, or topological dimension of the attractor (see Section 5.2).
However, this idealized and mathematically rigorous procedure has
two practical shortcomings. The first one is evident: it is technically
difficult to determine d for a system with sufficiently large (> 3)
dimension. The other shortcoming is more subtle: the described proce­
dure does not distinguish any particular points of the attractor even
though as a rule a trajectory approaches certain places more frequently
than other places. Therefore, the exposure of the whole attractor set takes
an impractically long time.
Another measure which is sensible to inhomogeneity of the passing
frequency of a trajectory can be the entropy defined as follows.
Let us identify the trajectory \(t) with the microstate of the system
measured with accuracy e. Divide the phase space into cells of character­
istic size £. Let Pt be the probability that the trajectory x(0 passes through
the /-th cell. Then, by analogy with statistical physics, the entropy of the
system is given by
Nje)

S(e)=~2_jP,lnPh
i-i

(10)

132

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

where N(e) is the total number of cells. When decreasing the value of e the
entropy changes logarithmically:

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

S(e)s*S0 - dslne,

e^O,

(11)

the constant d, is called the entropy or the information dimension
(Famer, 1982).
It turns out that the entropy dimension can never exceed the
topological one (Grassberger and Procaccia, 1983). Indeed, consider the
set of successive values of the coordinate, xu x2, ..., xk, ..., xm. The
probability of finding xk within the j'-th cell is
P, = lim —,
m-*a> tn
where nt is the number of positions xk that are within this cell.
For homogeneous covering of the attractor, J>, = N~x. As follows from
(10) and the equality N = N0e~d,
S(e) = In N(e) = const. — d In e.
Thus, for homogeneous covering we have ds = d. It is well known that
under any deviation from homogeneity, the entropy only decreases.
Therefore, ds« d.
Grassberger and Procaccia (1983) have introduced the attractor
dimension which is very convenient for practical purposes. This dimen­
sion characterizes the shape of the spatial correlation function of the
attracting set and can be found from successive measurements of one of
the dynamic variables based on a computer simulation or experiment.
The very possibility of describing a complicated attracting set in multi­
dimensional phase space using only one variable (i.e., a single projec­
tion!) is surprising. Such a possibility is associated with, first, the fact that
dynamic variables that determine the coordinates of the phase space
obey the system of ordinary differential equations, x = f(x, y, z,...),
y = g(x, y,z,...),
z = h(x, y, z,...),...
which can be reduced by differ­
entiation in time to a single equation that includes only x{t) and its time-

133

FRACTALS AND DIMENSIONS

derivatives, x(t), x(t), 'x(t), ... Secondly, Ruelle (1981) has shown that
instead of the sequence (x, x, x,...) one can consider the sequence
x(t),x(t + r),x(t + 2r),...,x(t

+ (N-

1)T)

(12)

characterized by a fixed lag T. At any moment tt the point sequence (12)
belonging to the attractor can be conveniently written as

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

\Xj\

= X[, X2,

. . . , Xn

. . . ,

XN.

Next we construct the vectors

whose lengths are m and which are constructed at every point x,, x 2 , . . . ,
xN. Their length m should exceed the expected number of dynamic
variables.
The spatial correlations are characterized by the following function:
the number of points whose distance^
>.

1
Ct(r) = - X • to the /-th point does not exceed r:

N

After summation over all the points, we come to a correlation integral of
the form

(

the number of point pairs whose
separation |4, — £,| does not
exceed r

More formally,
j

"

C(f) = lim — y

6(r ~ | i - S,|),

(13)

134

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

where 6 is the unit step function and the point separation can be
understood in the usual Euclidean sense:
% ~ $,l = [(*/ - Xjf + (*.+. " W

+ • • • +(*,+«-■ - *,+«-.) 2 ]' /2 -

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

Grassberger and Procaccia (1983) have determined the dependence of
log Con log r for a number of well known dynamic systems which possess
strange attractors and revealed that for sufficiently small r this depen­
dence is a power-law:

C(r)~r\

r«e«l.

The power index determines the correlation dimension through
yv = lim [log C(r)/log r}.

(14)

# — 00

r~t

It is clear by definition that
v < d, < d.
This important conclusion is justified by mathematical proofs and
illustrated by explicit examples (Eckman and Ruelle, 1985). For example,
for the mapping
xn+l = ax„(\ ~ xn),

a = 3.5699456...,

(15)

which possesses a strange attractor, calculations with the use of expres­
sions (13) and (14) for TV = 30.000 yields v = 0.500 (±0.005) while
ds =s 0.517 and d^ 0.538. For the Lorenz system with R = 28, a = 10,
b = 8/3 and N = 15.000, the result is v = 2.05 ± 0 . 1 and v = a = d
with good accuracy.
It should be noted that log C does not always vary linearly with log r.
For a very small r one usually encounters a considerable scatter of points
associated with poor statistics (insufficiently large N) or experimental
noise. For a large r, the finite size of the attractor becomes essential.

135

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

FRACTALS AND DIMENSIONS

Therefore, for the practical application of this method of determining the
dimension one should single out a linear segment of the plot (log C, log r)
and measure the slope angle.
The first application of the method of Grassberger and Procaccia
considered experiments with the Rayleigh-Benard convection; the result
was v = 2.8 (Malraison et ai, 1983). The gradual increase of the
dimension of the vector £,(m) shows that the measured dimension v
becomes stable when m = 6 — 8. Thus, the low numbers of modes
excited in connection are directly indicated by the experiments. For an
infinite effective number of modes, v would grow infinitely with m. This
fact was verified by the analysis of the white noise where v proved to be
growing linearly with m.
The system usually encountered in these experiments are nonlinear
systems of a low number of excited modes contaminated by statistical
noise, e.g., the white noise. Since noise dominates at small scales, for very
small values of r one should obtain v ~ m while for moderate r, the
dimension v tends to a certain, not very large, value as m grows; and
v < m always (Fig. 5.8).
To conclude this chapter, we note that the analysis of mathematical
objects always has two different aspects. The first is the creation of the
mathematical image of reality. For instance, the Peano curve is the
mathematical image of a tangled thread ball. On the other hand — and
this is the other aspect — Peano has constructed a specific example of

/

* — > - — i

i

«

—

I

/

/

*

I

/

/

I

I

—

i

>

io

m

Fig. 5.8. The limiting value of v(m) determines the dimension.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

136

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

Fig. 5.9. The structure of the fractal set considered by Mandelbrot (1977) resembles a piece
of fabric knitted by a skilled craftsman.

such curve. If desired, one can analyse, e.g., the relation between the set
of self-intersection points of the Peano curve and the set of points whose
coordinates are rational numbers. This knowledge may be useless but
nobody can deny that some new useful theory can grow from one of such
seeds. The investigation of detailed properties of specific manifolds
described in Mandelbrot's book has a similar nature. Today this is a
mind game. It is remarkable, however, that this game gives aesthetically
satisfactory results. The patterns obtained by attaching different colours
to the details of Mandelbrot's manifold can be found in Duday (1985).
For many spectators it is not essential to specify which particular

FRACTALS AND DIMENSIONS

1 37

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

manifold was used by Mandelbrot for illustrating the properties of
fractals and which methods were used for visualizing these patterns; it
may be more interesting that these pictures would remind them of the
colour fantasies of G. Klimt and the technique of automatic painting
invented by the surrealists (see, e.g., Janicka, 1985); for others who have
business in the textiles industry, these pictures may mean profits (see
Fig. 5.9).

CHAPTER

SIX

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

PERCOLATION AND
RANDOM BOUNDARIES

6.1. CLUSTERS AND PERCOLATION
In Chapter 5 we have mentioned a model of a ball lightning in which the
active matter distribution forms a fractal cluster. The fractal properties
of the matter distribution make the combination of a small weight
(almost the whole volume of the ball lightning is free of active matter)
and great strength (even though the active matter occupies a small
fraction of volume, it penetrates to all parts of the lightning volume)
possible. It is clear that a suitable fractal dimension of the cluster is not
sufficient to reach the required strength of the construction. For a given
fractal dimension, the matter would be concentrated in numerous
relatively small and weakly connected clumps. The strength of the whole
construction would be insufficient. Apart from the fractal dimension, the
degree of internal connection plays an important role. It would be too
restrictive to require that all particles of the active matter are in contact
with one another (this is how the connection is understood in topology):
it is admissible that there are a few pieces or clumps within a ball
lightning. A more realistic picture is one that requires that there are
connected parts whose sizes are of the order of the overall size of the ball
lightning. Now we can distract ourselves from the fact that a ball
lightning has a finite size and we consider the problem at scales much
smaller than the lightning size. This brings us to an idealized description
of the fractal cluster of active matter within a ball lightning: to ensure its
strength, connected components that stretch from infinity to infinity
must be present. Thus, we have approached an important concept of
modern mathematics — percolation.
139

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

140

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

In our discussion, percolation appears to be connected to the model of
a ball lightning. Of course, this is not the most practical application of the
percolation theory. More important are the applications to the theory of
compositional materials which consist of a mixture of ingredients with
various properties. Consider the conductivity of a sample made of a
pressed mixture of pieces of conductors and insulators. Clearly, the
conductivity essentially depends very much on whether or not the
electric current can flow along the system of conducting pieces. This
phenomenon gives rise to the term "percolation" applied in various areas
of science. Another important application of the percolation theory is in
cosmology where the percolation properties of matter distribution in the
universe are analyzed.
Mentioning the example of a composite material pressed from a metal
and a dielectric, we imply that we have a sufficiently big, homogeneous
piece in which the contents are oriented, on the average, isotropically and
placed randomly. In a general case, the percolation theory usually
considers the percolation properties of random sets in an infinite space
when probability distributions, which determine these sets, are homo­
geneous and isotropic.
Nowadays, acceptable conceptions of the properties of percolation
objects have been formed. In a popularized form, they are summarized
by Efros (1982). First, it seems that the possibility of percolation depends
only weakly on the shape and detailed structure of elementary objects
forming a percolating cluster (pieces of metal in the example above). This
hypothesis, known as the hypothesis of universality, is plausible as long
as the size of the percolating cluster is much larger than the size of the
individual pieces of metal. Next, it is clear that the percolation properties
essentially depend on whether the considered object is one-dimensional
or three-dimensional. In one-dimensional objects, percolation is practi­
cally impossible: any small particle of an ideal insulator disconnects the
one-dimensional electrical circuit. In two dimensions, percolation over
the metal phase implies impossibility of percolation over the insulator
phase and vice versa, provided that the considered system is statistically
isotropic. It is then natural to assume that in this case percolation is
possible over the phase which occupies more than half of the area. In
three dimensions, percolation can occur over both phases simul­
taneously. One can therefore expect that for small concentrations of the
metal phase percolation over this phase is impossible, for higher

PERCOLATION AND RANDOM BOUNDARIES

141

concentration percolation occurs over both phases, and for still higher
concentration of the metal phase percolation occurs over this phase
exclusively. When the statistical properties of both the metal and
dielectric phases depend identically on concentration, the thresholds for
percolation (i.e., the value of concentration Cm for which percolation
begins over the metal phase and the value Cd for which percolation ceases
over the dielectric phase) are connected by an obvious relation

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

cm= i - c „ .
Numerical simulation gives C m «0.16. This important figure will be
frequently used below. Thus, as little as about twenty percent of the
conductivity admixture make a composite material conductive. When
the fraction of metal reaches approximately eighty percent, percolation
over the dielectric becomes impossible; it becomes isolated into
separated pieces.
The theory of percolation is now a vast field of mathematics and
physics where the results are based on rigorous theorems as well as on
numerical simulations and physical experiments. During the last thirty
years, the pioneering work of English physicist and engineer Brodbent
and mathematician Hammersley has given birth to an immense number
of papers. In order to give a more concrete idea of applications of these
results, we consider an example of the percolation properties of magnetic
field lines (Zeldovich, 1983).
Importance of magnetic lines, which are determined by the equation
dr = B(r)</«

(1)

(where a is an arbitrary scalar parameter), has been revived in recent
decades, many years after their introduction by M. Faraday, mainly in
connection with the problem of controlled thermonuclear fusion and
problems of astrophysics, where the magnetic field is frozen into a
plasma. In this case the plasma distinguishes a natural reference frame in
three-dimensional space, comoving with the fluid, in which a (pseudo)
vector B is determined (in contrast to the electromagnetic field tensor F^
in empty Minkowski's space where there is no such frame).

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

142

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

Let us consider the topological properties of systems of magnetic lines.
One of the important questions is: can magnetic lines extend to infinity
in this or that direction? One can replace magnetic lines by narrow pipes
filled with a liquid and ask whether or not a given system of pipes can
transport the liquid to infinite distances. This percolational statement of
the problem is complementary to the analysis of linkages of magnetic
lines thoroughly developed by Moffatt and other authors (see MofFatt,
1969; Zeldovich et ai, 1983; Ruzmaikin and Sokoloff, 1980).
Percolation along magnetic lines is interesting mainly because the
charged particles are spiralling along these lines. Evidently, the thermal
conductivity of fusion plasmas, as determined by diffusion of electrons,
depends on the properties of the magnetic lines and the surfaces around
which the lines are wound. In particular, Kadomtsev and Pogutse (1979)
consider a three-dimensional problem in which a weak random twodimensional magnetic field b = {bx, by, 0) is superimposed on a strong
uniform field B = (0,0, B0) directed along the z-axis. Diffusion and heat
conduction are determined by the tangling of magnetic lines associated
with the presence of b. The two-dimensional field b can be expressed
through a scalar function a of two variables, i.e., the z-component of the
vector potential a = (0, 0, a):
da
b* = —\
dy

,
-da
*>,-—-.
dx

(2)

On the plane (x, y), the magnetic lines wound around the maxima in a
counter-clockwise direction and around the minima in a clockwise
direction.
When a is independent of both the time / and the z-coordinate, the
problem reduces to the percolation properties of a random function of
two variables.
Let us adopt the following normalization:
(a)-0;

(fl2) = l .

(3)

Let us also consider the sufficiently smooth functions a, whose autocorre­
lation function is also sufficiently small at large distances. Using a

PERCOLATION AND RANDOM BOUNDARIES

143

spectral representation, this means that the Fourier transform of a has
random phases and amplitudes ak such that, e.g.,
(a*)~exp( - — J ,

k>ko,

and

(4)

(

A:\2"

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

—J , «>0,

k«k0.

It is natural to expect that the regions where a > e (with e > 0), which
occupy less than half the total area, are isolated (islands) and there is no
percolation over them. One may also introduce the quantity 1(e) that
characterizes the average size of an island or the average length of the
isoline that surrounds an island.
In a two-dimensional problem, when the plane is divided into regions
of two types, it is natural to assume that when the regions of one type
form isolated islands, the regions of the other type form a globally
connected ocean. Correspondingly, the conditions a < e and e > 0
determine a unified region along which percolation occurs.3 The value
e = 0 is critical with respect to the possibility of percolation.
Kadomtsev and Pogutse (1979) obtained an estimate of the function
1(e) and suggested that the properly averaged value of/(e) plays the role
of the effective free pathlength in the theory of diffusion and heat
conduction.
In plasma devices with strong longitudinal field Bz = BQ, there is no
reason to believe that the weak perturbations, b, are independent of z
and/or time. Let us consider an opposite case when (i) either the field B0
directed along z is absent or there is periodicity along the z-axis, with
period 2nR that corresponds to a torus of large radius R with the z-axis
chosen along the torus' large circumference; (ii) the two-dimensional
field b is independent of both z and /; and (iii) the total field is strong and

* Some parts of the region where a < e can form lakes isolated from the percolating ocean.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

144

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

charged particles move along the magnetic lines, i.e., the Larmor radius r
of the electrons' spiral trajectories is neglected as well as the collisions
and other effects that can cause jumps of the electrons from one magnetic
line to another.
Due to this change of the magnetic field configuration, the solution of
the considered problem becomes quite different from that obtained by
Kadomtsev and Pogutse (1979): in a two-dimensional random field,
diffusion of electrons is impossible, i.e., diffusivity is zero. To express
this result in a constructive form, this means that the diffusion
approximation is applicable only in such large space-time scales where
the dependence on z and t is essential. At smaller space-time scales, the
turbulent diffusion approximation is inapplicable.
This result is based on the fact that orbits of the electrons in the {x, y)
plane turn out to be closed. When the initial smooth distributions of the
electron number density n and the temperature T are given, the motion
along the closed orbits leads to nothing else but only averaging over the
orbit. In this approximation, the values averaged over the orbits, n and
T, remain always different for different orbits.
Another formulation of the problem considers a layer of finite
thickness, e.g., 0 < x < x0, where the considered two-dimensional
random magnetic field is concentrated. The currents flowing along the zdirection that produce the field b are absent on both sides of this layer.
Let us prescribe the value «, of the number density to the left of the
layer {x < 0) and another value n2 to the right (x > x0). The particle flux is
given by
qx = / ) ( « , - n2)/x0,

(5)

following the definition of coefficient of diffusion D. It is now clear that
with the growth of the layer thickness x0 the fraction of orbits which are
not closed within the layer (i.e., between x = 0 and x = x0) decreases.
Therefore, the particle flux decreases more rapidly than Xo', either as
x^m with m> 1 or as exp (—/CQX0). But this implies that there is no
definite value of D and in the limit of large x0, the effective value of
D tends to zero.
A finite (non-vanishing) value of D can be obtained only when the
Larmor radius r is finite.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

PERCOLATION AND RANDOM BOUNDARIES

145

In a similar problem of a two-dimensional steady vortex motion of
incompressible fluid, the turbulent diffusivity is non-vanishing only
when the molecular diffusivity k is non-vanishing (Zeldovich, 1982). In
this case D is proportional to a certain fractional power of k.
In this respect, a two-dimensional steady motion is similar to a onedimensional unsteady motion (Zeldovich, 1982). The analogous corre­
spondence with the patterns of caustic lines (or surfaces) in problems
with equal numbers of variables (e.g., either x and torx and y) was noted
by Arnold (1982).
In similar completely three-dimensional stationary problems as well as
in two-dimensional non-stationary problems (three variables, either x, y,
z or x, y, t), both the electron diffusivity D along the magnetic lines and
the turbulent diffusivity D, of hydrodynamic motion differ from zero
even in the limits r-»0 and k ~- 0.
To verify this, consider, e.g., a non-stationary two-dimensional per­
colation problem for a system of magnetic lines with arbitrary unsmooth
dependence of the magnetic field on time. Here a particle moves along a
closed field line around some center during the time interval T, and
during this period its coordinates differ from their initial values by at
most the orbit radius. In the following time interval T2 , after the magnetic
field has abruptly changed, the particle can jump to another center and
move along a new trajectory which is independent of the previous one.
Evidently, after a few such steps, the displacement grows with the
square root of time, that is, according to the typical diffusive law.
Let us consider briefly the percolation properties of a two-dimensional
field consisting of two components, a steady uniform field and a
randomly varying field. The weak random field bends the field lines of
the uniform field only slightly. It is clear that the only physical effect is
the following. In some places, where the random field is sufficiently
strong, local catastrophes lead to the isolation of islands of closed
streamlines associated with the local maxima of a accompanied by saddle
points.
More interesting is the opposite case when a very weak uniform steady
field is imposed on a given random field. It can be shown that the
magnetic flux corresponding to the uniform field concentrates into
narrow ropes (channels) along which occurs percolation in the direction
of the uniform field, even though the ropes are tangled. Within the ropes
the field strength is of the order of the r.m.s. chaoticfield;weakness of the

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

146

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

uniform field leads to the narrowness of the ropes.
Note one more particular case. Consider a uniform field in an ideally
conducting medium. The random motion of the medium amplifies the
field. The flux is conserved because under chaotic tangling the mean
cosine of the angle between the current field direction and the original
one tends to zero. The percolation remains to be ideal until the field is
frozen into the medium and the field lines do not reconnect. The pattern
of narrow percolation that channels here arises only after a sufficient
time has elapsed from the beginning of the motion.
To conclude this discussion of percolation along the magnetic lines of a
two-dimensional field, we should emphasize that although this picture
seems to be quite natural, it implicitly relies on a non-trivial restriction
on the magnetic field configuration. This restriction can be conveniently
expressed in terms of the correlation properties of electric currents that
produce the considered magnetic fields; recall that in the two-dimen­
sional case, the current j is directed along the z-axis and is related to the
potential a through
Aa = j .
It can be shown (Zeldovich, 1983) that the discussion above implicitly
assumes that the electric currents are positively correlated, i.e.,
(j(x)j(x + i))*0.

(6)

In particular, the discussion above is applicable when the considered
magnetic field is produced by currents that are directed completely at
random (are uncorrelated). However, the situation can be very different
when the currents are screened and thus compensated. Percolation in a
more complicated system is considered in the following section where the
cosmological percolation problem serves as an example.
6.2. INTERMITTENCY AND PERCOLATION
The picture described in the previous section reflects only one aspect of
percolation even though it is very important. In order to reveal another
aspect, let us turn to matter percolation in the universe. Presently, the

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

PERCOLATION AND RANDOM BOUNDARIES

147

average matter density in the universe is much below the density of any
cosmic body, from planets to galaxies and galaxy clusters. This implies
that matter is distributed uniformly only over a large scale while at
smaller scales the distribution is highly non-uniform: vast voids coexist
with compact clumps of matter. The volume fraction occupied by these
clumps (specifically, the galaxy clusters) is considerably smaller than the
constant of percolation, 0.16. Thus, the results of Section 6.1 seem to
imply that galaxy clusters should form isolated islands separated by
voids. Such distribution of matter in the universe coincides with the
clustering model which assumes that the observed structure of the
universe is the result of progressive hierarchical clustering of matter at
much larger scales. It is noticeable that a careful analysis of observations
definitely rejects this model (see the review of Zeldovich and Shandarin,
1982) and it can be consistent with observations only with a very low pro­
bability. In other words, the galaxy clusters cannot be described as balls
widely scattered according to the Poisson law. In order to reach a correct,
rather than apparent, conclusion about matter distribution in the
universe, one should remember (Zeldovich, 1983) that at the earlier
stages of evolution of the expanding universe matter distribution was
quite different: almost all the matter was in the state of high density,
exceeding the average density of the present universe. At these epochs,
the matter that now forms clusters of galaxies occupied a major fraction
of the universe volume. The results of Section 6.1 then imply that
percolation at that time must proceed along these dense regions while the
future voids must be isolated. The present low-density state of the
universe is produced from a dense state of the early universe due to
expansion which can be considered here as continuous mapping.
Obviously, a continuous mapping cannot affect the percolation proper­
ties of the objects, i.e., even now the percolation must occur along the
system of galaxy clusters.
Thus, we have reached a paradoxial result: the concepts of percolation
discussed in Section 6.1 seem to imply that both clusters and voids must
be isolated in the present universe.
The paradox is solved as follows. It seems plausible that matter
inhomogeneities in the early universe are approximately spherical in
shape and the percolating structure of the dense regions is formed by
contacts of these spherical regions. The situation is quite different at the

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

148

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

present epoch: during the expansion of the universe, the gravitational
instability, to the first approximation, compresses the matter inhomogeneities along one direction only while expansion still can occur along
the remaining two directions (Zeldovich, 1970). As a result, matter is
concentrated within flat, thin formations — like pancakes. Thus, the
percolation theory for the present universe should incorporate an
additional characteristic parameter, a small ratio of the thickness of the
pancake to its diameter. The value of this parameter is considerably
smaller than the value 0.16 of the three-dimensional percolation para­
meter; percolation properties of the matter distribution are determined
by the former parameter. Gravitational instability leads to the pron­
ounced cellular structure of the matter distribution in which large voids
are separated by very thin walls that contain the principal part of the total
mass.
We see that the intermittency in the distribution of a random field can
qualitatively modify the percolation properties. Percolation properties of
a system of thin, long strings or plates can considerably differ from those
of a system with more or less spherical bodies considered in Section 6.1.
This kind of percolation is very important for many applications. For
example, the implantation of flat flakes of suitable impurity into a
polymer can lead to a considerable slowing down of its deterioration with
time. Modern advances in the theory of percolation in intermittent
media are reviewed by Menshikov et al. (1986). The authors are much
indebted to S.A. Molchanov for numerous discussions of the percolation
theory reflected in this chapter.
In three-dimensional intermittent systems, percolation seems to be
associated with the presence of a rather long and thin structure. For
moderate ratios of the impurity bodies or for low concentrations, their
role seems to be negligible. An implicit indication of this is a low value of
the percolation threshold even for spherical particles, Cm « 0.16.
The situation is different in two dimensions where percolation is not
connected with any small parameters. In particular, Menshikov et al.
(1986) proposed the following picture of two-dimensional intermittent
percolation: for small concentrations of the conductor phase, percolation
cannot occur along it, for its large concentration stops percolation over
the insulator phase. However, unlike non-intermittent distributions, for
intermittent distributions transition between these two regimes occurs
before the conductor phase reaches half the volume. Around the state

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

PERCOLATION AND RANDOM BOUNDARIES

149

with equal concentrations of both phases, there is a finite interval of
concentrations for which percolation does not occur along either phase.
The structure in these cases is similar to a set of nested alternating closed
layers of conductor and insulator. What occurs is a local spontaneous
violation of translational symmetry and the matter distribution re­
sembles a polycrystal whose individual crystals consist of such nested
layers. An isolated set of nested layers has a distinguished center. A
nested-layer monocrystal has finite size but a large number of such
monocrystals fill the pores of a larger nested-layer monocrystal. The
resulting hierarchy of nested-layer monocrystals is translationally invar­
iant (see Fig. 6.1). In finite bodies, such a structure leads to irregular
changes of conductive to insulating properties under weak changes of size
of samples.

Fig. 6.1. Qualitative scheme of nested structure for which percolation is impossible over
either phase in two dimensions.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

150

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

These ideas can be expressed also in another way. For intermittent
media, the standard ergodic concepts are typically violated. In the
considered case, intermittency leads to ambiguity of the notion "percola­
tion threshold". This threshold can be understood as a critical value of
the concentration at which exists an infinite cluster of a given phase (CH),
or as the value of concentration at which the mathematical expectation
value of the cluster size becomes infinite (Cj-0). One can also introduce
an intermediate percolation threshold, C^ for which the p-th moment of
the cluster size becomes infinite. Finally, one more quantitative charac­
teristic of the percolation can be introduced, that is the value of the
concentration C, for which
limi>(/) = 0 ,
where P(l) is the probability of percolation through a region of size /.
Clearly,
C,< . . . < C}" +l) < CP...

*£ C ^ * CH.

(7)

These relations among the differently defined percolation thresholds can
be compared with the relations among the growth rates of the magnetic
field moments in a typical realization in a random medium (see Chapter
9).
Differences in the various thresholds can be considered as a criterion
of the intermittent character of percolation. Modern theory has not as yet
studied relations between differently defined thresholds in full detail.
More or less understood is not the problem of percolation on a
continuous plane but the more artificial problem of percolation on a
metal lattice with randomly scattered inclusions of insulator. Kesten
(1982) has proved that if these inclusions are uncorrelated, then all kinds
of thresholds exactly coincide. Menshikov et al. (1986) conjectured that
for Poisson random fields, the percolation thresholds differ due to well
pronounced correlations. For Gaussian fields, intermittent percolation,
i.e., strict inequalities in (7), seems to be impossible, at least when the
field correlation function is non-negative.

PERCOLATION AND RANDOM BOUNDARIES

1S1

In its initial formulation, the percolation theory considers percolation
along purely random regions. This theory is related to another realm of
problems in which the presence of some degree of regularity is essential,
e.g., in the case of regions with regular but randomly deformed
boundaries. Such regions are exemplified by deformed or imperfect
resonators. The theory of such resonators has some common aspects with
the theory of percolation, and we shall briefly consider them in the
following section (Zeldovich and Sokoloff, 1983).

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

6 J.

EIGEN-OSCILLATIONS OF A REGION WITH RANDOM
BOUNDARY

Modern mathematical physics considers the analysis of generic problems
(see, e.g., Arnold, 1983) very important. These problems often drastically
differ from exactly solvable problems where solvability is associated with
a high degree of symmetry. One particular case of a generic problem is the
problem with statistically (randomly) determined parameters.
Here we consider the question of eigen-oscillations of a region with
randomly determined boundary, i.e., the question of eigenfunctions of
the problem
Au = -k2u,

tt\3sla) = 0 ,

where d^ito) is the random boundary and (o is the random parameter
(Babich and Buldyrev, 1972).
First consider a one-dimensional problem where the random region is
a line segment [a((o), b(o))]. Although the solutions to this problem are
random functions, the «-th eigenfunction has, like the deterministic one,
n — 1 zeros in the interval (a, b) so that the distance between the zeros is
of the order of (b — a)/n. In the one-dimensional case, the requirement
of generic properties does not introduce novel properties into the
structure of the zeros of an eigenfunction. The situation is more
complicated in multi-dimensional cases.
Consider now a two-dimensional region £"((o) whose boundary is close
to a regular curve of diameter 2R, e.g., to a circle of radius R or a square
of side R. This regular curve is disturbed by a random function which is

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

152

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

locally similar to the Wiener process, i.e., A<^~ (A/) l/2 , where A<j; is the
deviation from the unperturbed curve and A/ is the coordinate measured
along the regular curve.
The eigenfunctions have zero lines within the region £"(a)), which are
analogous to the zeros of one-dimensional eigenfunctions. The zero line
patterns can be used for topological classification of the eigenfunctions.
Excitation of the next higher oscillation mode adds an extra zero line.
Due to the random nature of the boundary, this new line with probability
unity does not intersect other zero lines. Indeed, level lines u = 0 of a
random function u(r) have no singular points. The intersection of two
zero-level contour lines is not a generic event in the random media, i.e.,
in the space of the surfaces the measure corresponding to this event is
zero. A formal proof of this fact can be found in Bruning (1978).
Therefore, n zero lines divide the region J?(co) into n + 1 parts. These
zero lines must either be close to or intersect the region boundary. Of
course, in contrast to the one-dimensional case, the number of zero lines
now cannot completely describe an eigenfunction; an accurate classifica­
tion should be taken into account as well as the topology of the network of
zero lines.
We should stress that the absence of any symmetry in the shape of the
considered region implies that the distance between zero lines is of the
order of R/n, i.e., zero lines can approach each other closely only with a
small probability or for large n.
When there is some symmetry, the set of zero lines can have a more
complicated structure. Due to symmetry, zero lines can have numerous
mutual intersections so that m + n zero lines parallel to the sides of a
regular square divide the square into (m + 1) (n + 1) regions (see
Fig. 6.2). R. Courant (see Hilbert and Courant, 1981) has obtained an
estimate of the number of such regions as a function of the eigenfunction's order. He has also noted that in degenerate situations, including
the problem of oscillations in a square, only a few very symmetric
eigenfunctions provide that large number, (m + 1) (« + 1), of regions
separated by zero lines. A linear combination of eigenfunctions with
generic coefficients behaves similarly to an eigenfunction of a statistical
problem. The intersection points of zero lines are destroyed while the
zero lines become closed. However, in this case the intersections of zero

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

PERCOLATION AND RANDOM BOUNDARIES

153

Fig. 6.2. Schematic structure of zero lines of eigenfunctions in problems (a) with
symmetry; (b) with weak deviation of symmetry due to boundary perturbation; (c) with
strongly violated symmetry.

lines are destroyed due to violation of the symmetry by the coefficients of
the linear combination of symmetric eigenfunctions, rather than due to
violation of the region's symmetry.
There exists a class of perturbations of a symmetric region that leads
to, in a certain sense, weak perturbation of the pattern of zero lines even
though the intersection points are destroyed (see, e.g., Babich and
Buldyrev, 1972; Lazutkin, 1979). It turns out that when a circle is
perturbed in such a way that the curve remains convex, the distance
between neighbouring closed zero lines is exponentially small in the
perturbation, rather than of the order of R/n. In this case, perturbation of
the boundary is too weak to lead to a considerable change of the zero lines
pattern.
One can also analyze the opposite case of very strong perturbations
which drastically change the picture. This change is associated with the
fact that, apart from eigen-oscillations localized far from the boundary,
which were considered above, there arise in a region with random
boundary special boundary-layer eigen-oscillations of the type of Echo
Wall.6 Their existence is associated with the irregularities of the
boundary and interference of the eigenwaves at these irregularities. Such
b

The Echo Wall, known as the Whispering Galleries in Russian, a masterpiece of Chinese
architecture in Beijing, more than adequately describes the phenomenon. A whispering
sound propagates very far along these walls, to distances where one cannot normally hear
a loud voice originating from the same location (Fig. 6.3).

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

154

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

Fig. 6.3. The Echo Wall in Beijing always attract tourists (the illustration from Peng Zhen,
1986).

oscillations decay exponentially with distance from the boundary and the
question of the structure of zero lines is of minor importance for them.
However, if the surface diameter ~2R is much greater than the
perturbation amplitude and, in addition, the perturbed boundary length
does not differ by an order of magnitude from 2R, then "whispering" per­
turbations are negligibly deep within the considered region. The situation
is different in three (and more) dimensions. In such a case, the boundary
area (~/?2) grows faster than its diameter and the large area of the
boundary leads to the plausible appearance of high peaks of height ~R
even if the probability of such a peak is low. Therefore, in the three-di­
mensional case, the dependence required for the damping of boundarylayer perturbations is A<j| ~ (A/)3/2.
Let us now discuss how these problems are connected with the
percolation theory. To do this, one should consider a double limit case
when both the region size and order of the eigenfunction simultaneously
tend to infinity so that the characteristic value of the wave number

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

PERCOLATION AND RANDOM BOUNDARIES

155

constant. In this case, the problem reduces to that of a random function <p
with zero mean value whose spectrum is concentrated in the "sphere"
\K\ = K0 (see Section 6.1).
Now we are able to formulate the percolation problem, i.e., the
question whether or not it is possible to pass from infinity to infinity, e.g.,
along the regions where the eigenfunction q> is positive. In three
dimensions, the possibility of percolation is typical. For a very large e,
exceeding some critical value CQ, percolation is impossible along the
region with p > e; for £„ > e > — £<, percolation occurs over both regions
with <p > e and <p< e; for smaller e percolation along the region with q> < e
is impossible. Roughly, the value of e^ is of the order of {<p2)l/2 which
means that for a Gaussian random variable the region with q> > £$
occupies 1/6 of the total volume. This problem is much more compli­
cated in two dimensions where simultaneous percolation along both
phases is impossible. In the two-dimensional case, the simplest possi­
bility is the following. For any e > 0 the lines <p = e and <p = — e delineate
a system of islands with positive and negative values of (p. There can exist
a system of lakes with <p of opposite sign within any island. When e tends
to zero, the picture remains qualitatively the same: the sea between the
islands reduces to a system of channels but the islands remain isolated.
However, one can envisage another intermittent picture: at a certain
value of e a "phase transition" occurs and the system of islands and
channels is replaced by a nested-layer structure with islands of smaller
size nested in larger islands with opposite sign of q> so that the whole is­
land hierarchy is infinite.
6.4. THE ZEROS OF EIGENFUNCTIONS OF FREE AND
FORCED OSCILLATIONS
The question of the structure of the manifold in which the oscillation
amplitude in a resonator vanishes is also close to the percolation
problem. In the simplest case, for a three-dimensional resonator this
manifold consists of surfaces. However, in the generic case the oscillation
amplitude vanishes at one-dimensional manifold lines which are closed
or otherwise begin and end at the region boundary. After traversing along
a closed zero-amplitude line, the oscillation phase changes by ± 2n.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

156

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

The appearance of topological singularities of filamentary structure
whose traversal changes the phase by ± 2n is typical of many physical
problems. Polyakov (1975) has noticed such singularities in the theory of
spontaneous symmetry breaking. Consider a complex scalar field \f/. For
the fields that appear in the cosmological inflation theory, the vacuum
corresponds to ^ = 4/0 =t 0. If the phase changes by ± 2n after traversing
along a closed contour, this contour must enclose a line (string) at which
\p = 0. Similar ideas can be developed for auto-oscillatory systems.
Aldushin et al. (1980) consider the surface of a flame in the case where its
propagation at constant speed is unstable, while nonlinear effects
stabilize oscillations of the flame front at a certain amplitude and phase
and the transverse dissipation equalizes the phase over the whole flame
surface. If the initial conditions are such that at a certain contour on the
flame surface the phase changes by ±2n, then this contour must enclose
a point with a vanishing oscillation amplitude. This singularity occurs at
a point rather than a line because the flame surface is two-dimensional.
Singular lines are typical of three-dimensional auto-oscillatory systems.
Similar problems appear in the theory of chemical auto-oscillatory
systems and in the theory of nearly parallel rays (Berry and Nye, 1974;
Ivanitsky et al., 1978; Baranova and B. Zeldovich, 1981).
Similar lines also arise in the simple case of a linear oscillatory system
with periodic external forcing or dissipation.
To verify this, recall that the equation of oscillations supplemented by
the boundary condition u = 0 at a closed surface represents a self-adjoint
problem for the equation Au = —(o2u. Therefore, its solutions are real.
Even if some eigenfunctions u„ are complex, the conjugated functions u„
are also solutions corresponding to the same eigenvalue a>; these pairs of
eigenfunctions can be represented as pairs of real functions whose zeros
lie on a surface. A similar result applies to the case of phased forcing, i.e.,
when the condition u(s, t) = R(s) exp (icot) with real R applies to some
part of the boundary surface.
Let us now turn to the case where zero surfaces are replaced by zero
lines. The case of forced oscillations with unphased excitation,
R(s) = Rt(s) + iR2(s),

Ri

— # const.
R2

(8)

PERCOLATION AND RANDOM BOUNDARIES

157

is simple and clear. Indeed, due to the linearity of the problem solutions
have the form

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

u(t, r) = exp (icot)[px(r) + ip2(r)\,
where/), andp2 correspond to /?, and R2, respectively. Physical solution is
given by the real part of this expression, Re« = p{ cos cot + p2 sin cot, and
the condition u = 0 leads now to two conditions, pt = 0 and p2 = 0.
Thus, the zero manifolds are now intersections of two surfaces, i.e., the
lines. Note that for /?, oc R2 we have px oc p2 and Ren oc cos (cot + (p)
with (p constant. Thus, in this case the zero manifold is a surface, and it
reduces to a line only for Rt/R2 / const.
The situation is the same for oscillatory systems with damping or
radiation. The oscillations are now described by the equation u„ = Lu
where L is the differential operator. Consider a boundary-value problem
for this equation which is not self-adjoint, e.g., due to specific boundary
conditions. Evidently, in a generic case the eigenfunctions are complexvalued. Therefore, the amplitude of oscillations turns to zero on a line or,
in the case of an arbitrary number of dimensions, on a manifold with codimension 2 (co-dimension is the difference between dimensions of the
space and of the embedded surface).
V.I. Arnold has drawn our attention to the fact that the problem of zero
manifolds of eigen-oscillations was discussed by mathematicians, in
particular, problems like the oscillations of two-dimensional surfaces in
four-dimensional space. However, this direction has not been developed
too far. The reason for this is probably associated with the fact that in
classical problems of mathematical physics, even in the presence of nonself-adjoint operators, the situation usually is not generic and complexvalued frequencies correspond to real-valued eigenfunctions.
Let us illustrate the situation with examples. Consider dissipation
described by the term au,. Then the boundary value problem for the
oscillations is formulated as
,
(-co

u
+ iaco)u = AM, — (* = 0

158

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

and, for constant a, the substitution X2 = <o2 — iaco reduces the problem
to one of undamped oscillations. Based on the linearized Navier-Stokes
equation, let us now describe dissipation through the term V(AM),. Then
the corresponding boundary-value problem is given by

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

— (o2u=Au

u
+ icovAu; — li, = 0 .

For constant v the substitution A2 = w 2 (l + iwv)~l again reduces the
problem to a dissipationless one. Finally, consider a parabolic equation
u, = (v + iD.)Au. For u oc exp(yf )> the substitution A = y/(v + iSl) again
makes the problem self-adjoint in a homogeneous and isotropic case. In
these cases the complex-valued solutions arise only when, e.g., the
dissipation is inhomogeneous [cf. condition Rt/R2 ¥= const, in (8)]. The
zero lines also arise when the excited waves leave the considered region
through a hole.
Consider now another case of waves in an infinite medium:
u(t, r) = r~{ exp(/atf — ikr).
Due to planar symmetry, this complex solution differs from zero
everywhere. However, for the superposition of a spherically symmetric
spreading wave and a travelling planar wave (which introduces a
distinguished direction at infinity):
u(t, r) = [Ar'x exp(-ikr)

+ B txp(ikx)]exp(i(jot),

we see that the amplitude is zero when the two conditions are fulfilled:
first, r = r0 = A/B and second, on the sphere |r| = r0 the phases
r — x = 2nn/k with n = 0, 1, 2 , . . . coincide up to 2n. The zero lines are
of a few (with the number dependent on the value of kr0) parallels on the
spheres determined by the wave front. This group of problems is
important in the studies of weakly divergent light beams (Baranova and
Zeldovich, 1986).
All these results rely heavily on the monochromatic nature of oscilla­
tions. Qualitatively new physical effects can be associated with quasi-

PERCOLATION AND RANDOM BOUNDARIES

159

monochromatic oscillations. An important example is provided by the
Langmuir plasma oscillations whose wavelength is much greater than the
Debye wavelength. As a result, there arises a natural distinction between
fast and slow oscillations and the physical picture may reduce to a slow
drift of the zero lines of fast oscillations.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

6.5. THE MATHEMATICAL LANGUAGE OF
THE PERCOLATION THEORY
Traditionally, mathematics is considered as a science of quantitative
relations and spatial patterns. These two realms of mathematics were not
always in a harmonious combination and relation. In the second half of
the 19th century, it seemed that The Quantity had won this competition.
Treatises on geometry had got rid of drawings and figures, geometrical
problems had been translated into the language of equations and
methods of mathematical physics had merged with the theory of
differential equations. The Form won back in early 20th century when to­
pology appeared. In this non-quantitative science, even an invariant is
not necessarily a number. The modern development of mathematics can
be compared to a symphony with two dominating colliding themes. One
theme is the quantitative mathematics which becomes more and more
computerized, pays less attention to the rigorousness of proofs and
approaches further the applied sciences and engineering. Another theme
is the non-quantitative mathematics — geometry, topology, etc. This
branch of mathematics has found many unexpected common points with
the humanities and arts. It is still developing adequate language of selfexpression and is, therefore, much concerned with the rigorousness of its
proofs. However, this branch also makes its first steps toward computers,
declaring that the numerical nature of computer science represents only
the embryonic state of development of this science. Applications of nonquantitative mathematics to physics and other natural sciences are still
not numerous even though their number grows steadily. In this respect,
the mathematical method of percolation theory is unique, being almost
completely based on the achievements of non-quantitative mathematics.
Unfortunately, it is a tradition of this field of thought to express the
results in a very abstract way paying much attention to rigorous proofs.
As a result, books on percolation theory written by mathematicians often

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

160
*

- . +
t

-

♦

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

-

_

_^

+

_

*

-

♦

-

+ +

+

4

♦

+ ■ •

+

-

■»

+

*

♦

♦

_♦

♦

-

+

♦

_2

♦

+

J*

^

^

-

-

Fig. 6.4. In the knots problem, the knots conduct electric current with probability p (plus
signs) and are insulating with probability q = 1 — p (minus signs).

can only be understood by their authors. Percolation mathematicians are
more than suspicious about the results obtained with the help of
computers and persistently argue that simple and clear results obtained
in percolation theory by physicists may prove to be inaccurate, having
neglected a whole world of complex percolation phenomena like, e.g.,
intermittency. Hopefully, a synthesis of physical and mathematical
approaches to percolation theory will be reached in the foreseeable
future. But now we can only reflect this complicated state of lack of
mutual understanding and give only a hint on specific methods of
percolation theory.
The first step that mathematicians take in the studies of percolation is
the discretization of space. Instead of percolation along a region in which
a random field exceeds a given value, one considers percolation along a
regular lattice with certain links removed with a given probability. It
turns out that the result strongly depends on the manner of discretiza­
tion, i.e., on whether one considers a regular square, triangular, hexag­
onal or more complicated lattices. The links also can be removed in
different ways. For example, one can leave a chain crossing unaffected
with probability p and remove it with probability q = 1 - p. This
discretized problem is called the knot problem (see Fig. 6.4). Otherwise,
one can leave a link unaffected with probability p and remove it with
probability q = 1 - p (Fig. 6.5). This is the link problem. These two

PERCOLATION AND RANDOM BOUNDARIES

'

/

I

I

/

_/

161

/
'

/
s

'
The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

'

/

'

/

/

s

'
_s

Fig. 6.S. In the links problem, the square lattice (solid lines) and the dual one (dashed lines)
are shifted by a half-period with respect to each other along both axes.

kinds of formulation are seemingly analogous and one would expect that
percolation thresholds (i.e., those critical values pcr that correspond to
marginal percolation) are close to each other. However, the actual link
problem possesses higher symmetry than the knot problem. It turns out
that the destructive role of a removed crossing is more pronounced than
that of a removed link. To verify this, one should formulate the link
problem in a symmetric form. This is achieved by the construction of the
so-called dual lattice (Fig. 6.6) which is composed of connections
between the cell centers of the initial lattice. A crossing of the dual lattice
is considered present (switched on) when it crosses a removed crossing of
the initial lattice and vice versa. It can be seen easily that if percolation
occurs from the left to the right along the switched-on links of the initial
lattice, then removed links of the dual lattice are percolating from above
to below and vice versa. The absence of percolation along the switchedon links of the initial lattice implies percolation along the removed links
of the dual one. Unfortunately, it is very difficult to turn this intuitive
knowledge into a rigorously proved result (see Kesten, 1986). The
existence of such symmetry implies that percolation along the switchedon links is immediately followed by percolation along the removed links
when the critical value of probability is passed (i.e., the intermittent
percolation is impossible). Since the properties of the initial and dual
lattices are symmetric, this means that

162

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

~t- -t-i - 1 r1 i T"t" " I "
i

- 1 - -t-

-1- - l -

4- - 1 - 4- 4- _l_
i

Ti

.J_ t 4- _L1 _l_i .L i

"
i i 1
._L -\- .1
4IT
- 1 - -r
- i .
-_l_ +■_L ~T.-1- .-L
4 J -L 1 _L. _l_ . 1 J_ 1 1 1 —

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

.

i

-H -H

"-Pi 1■

1

Fig. 6.6. A dual lattice composed of connections between the cell centers of quadratic
lattice.

pcr = 0.5 .
There is no such symmetry for the knot problem and a similar procedure
brings us to a dual lattice whose percolation properties differ from those
of the initial one. For this reason the percolation threshold exceeds one
half in the knot problem. Numerical experiments give the value
p(r = 0.59.
Those cases where percolation thresholds can be estimated at the
mathematical level of rigor, without the aid of computers, are also based
on symmetry arguments, even though they are much more complicated
and subtle than in the problem considered above. Sometimes the
problem can be reduced to some equations. For instance, symmetry
arguments lead to the conclusion (see Efros, 1982, pp. 171-172) that the
percolation thresholds for the link problem on a triangular lattice obeys
the equation
Per' ~

far

+ 1 = 0 .

Verification of the fact that this equation has only one root

PERCOLATION AND RANDOM BOUNDARIES

163

^ = 2 s i n 7i

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

belonging to the interval 0 < P„ < 1 or an approximate estimation of this
root is a problem of quantitative mathematics, and the estimation can be
obtained easily with the help of a computer. However, these compu­
tational problems are incomparably easier than those that arise in an
attempt at direct numerical estimation of the percolation threshold.

CHAPTER

SEVEN

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

RANDOM HYDRODYNAMIC MOTIONS

A wide range of random phenomena is associated with hydrodynamic
motions. The two principal problems of modern hydrodynamics —
transition from a laminar flow to the turbulent one and the development
of coherent structures in turbulence — are connected with the interplay
of chance and order. As routinely emphasized in monograph studies and
reviews devoted to turbulence, the agent that destroys one of the regimes
or induces transition to another one is the nonlinear interactions of the
normal modes of the flow. This kind of approach considers randomness
either as a result (in transition from a laminar flow to the turbulent one)
or as a statistically prescribed background (developed turbulence) against
which the evolution proceeds. However, the role of chance in hydrodyna­
mics deserves to be considered more carefully and discussed in more
detail. Leaving aside attempts to give a complete description, we
demonstrate here some selected aspects and intricacies associated with
random hydrodynamic motions. To begin, we shall consider a kind of
hidden turbulence.
7.1. THE TURBULENT FLOW WHOSE VELOCITY IS LAMINAR
Consider the flow that has a stationary, smooth, 27r-periodic, solenoidal
velocity field:
vx = A sinz +

Ccosy,

vy = B sinx + Acosz,
165

(1)

166

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

vz = Csiny 4- B c o s x ,
where A, B and C are real constants. As shown by Arnold (1965), this flow
obeys the stationary Euler equation

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

(VXv)Xv=v(- + y j ,

with the obvious property that both the vectors v (the streamlines) and
V X v lie on the surfaces of constant enthalpy pip 4- v2/2 (because
their cross-product is directed orthogonally to these surfaces).
At first sight, the field (1) has nothing particularly interesting except
the fact that it coincides with its curl, V X v = y, i.e., belonging to the
class of Beltrami flows. In other words, the vector field (1) possesses
helicity, v-(V X v ) # 0 , and in this flow helicity attains its maximum
possible value.
Surprising things emerge when one considers trajectories of the fluid
particles in the velocity field (1), which are governed by the equations
dx
vx

dy
vy

dz
vz '

Performing numerical integration of these three equations for the case
A = 3 I / 2 , B = 21/2 and C = 1, Henon (1966) discovered regions of finite
sizes within which the trajectories are chaotic while they are quite regular
in the surrounding areas. A detailed study conducted later by Dombre et
al (1986) has shown that this picture is typical of all nonvanishing values of A, B, and C(ABC # 0). Fig. 7.1 illustrates the case
A = \,B = 2/3, and C = 1/3 (Dombre et al., 1986). The plane z = 0 is
repeatedly pierced by streamlines (such a plane is called the Poincare
plane). In the regions with ordered motions, subsequent points on this
plane which are traces of the same streamline belong to a line that
represents a cross-section of a certain two-dimensional surface. Such
surfaces are called KAM (Kolmogorov-Arnold-Moser) tori. According to
the KAM theory, the trajectories of the vector field always lie on tori or
rings (near boundaries), provided its curl is not collinear with the field

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

RANDOM HYDRODYNAMIC MOTIONS

167

Fig. 7.1. Schematic view of a cross-section of the Poincart planefilledby the trajectories of
a stochastic dynamic system. The regions a—/are filled by the cross-section of invariant
tori. In other parts (g and h), traces of stochastic trajectories can be seen. The trajectories do
not uniformly fill the invariant tori and the stochastic regions. This makes the character of
trajectories in the regions i — k uncertain.

itself, i.e. V X v ^ k v. In the considered case this condition is not fulfilled
and, apart from the tori, there appear regions with chaotic streamlines.
(The points shown in Fig. 7.1 trace a single trajectory that repeatedly
pierces the plane z = 0.)
When one of the constants vanishes, e.g., C = 0, then the system has a
first integral of motion Q>[x(t), y(t), z(t)] = <D0 = const, and thus the
streamlines lie on a surface Q>(x, y, z) = const. Therefore, the chaotic
regions are absent. The chaos can arise only in three-dimensional flows.
Numerical and analytical studies (Dombre et al., 1986) show that, first,
there exist regions where the flow is dominated by motion in some
chosen direction. Every such region has the shape of a rope parallel to one
of the axes. Taking into account the direction of the flow, we see that
there are six such principal rope-vortices in which the fluid moves along

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

168

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

helical trajectories. A fraction of the full rotation described by a helix
when the longitudinal coordinate changes by 2n is called the rotation
number. This number can acquire an arbitrary value. The helical
trajectories are called quasi-periodic orbits.
Secondly, for some values of A, B and C there are positions where the
velocity of the flow (1) vanishes (stagnation points). These positions can
be found by direct solution of the system (1) with the left-hand sides
equated to zero. Generally, there exist eight stagnation points. These
points (as well as unstable periodic orbits) probably play a decisive role
for the existence of chaotic regions. With respect to stability, stagnation
points can be divided into two classes: those in which the nearby
trajectories converge in two directions and diverge in the third one, and
those from which trajectories diverge in two directions. The correspond­
ing stable and unstable two-dimensional manifolds cross along the line
that connects the stagnation points of the different classes (zero-zero
lines). Due to the complexity of twisted stable and unstable twodimensional manifolds, the zero-zero lines form a tangled configuration
whose complexity probably results in chaos outside principal vortices.
The vortices themselves may be destroyed by the resonances that occur
for rational rotation numbers; such a destructive role is played, e.g., by
the resonance 3:1 (Dombre et al., 1986).
7.2. THE ROLE OF CHANCE IN TRANSITION TO
TURBULENCE
A steady flow of incompressible liquid, neglecting the effects of the finite
speed of sound, is determined by the shape of the region occupied by the
flow (usually, what matters is the characteristic region size, /[cm]), by a
characteristic velocity »[cms"'], and by kinematic viscosity of the liquid
v[cm 2 s -1 ]. These quantities can be combined into a single dimensionless
combination known as the Reynolds number
h
Re = - .
v

(2)

Flows with equal Reynolds numbers in geometrically similar regions are
also similar (the similarity law of Reynolds). For instance, the solution of

169

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

RANDOM HYDRODYNAMIC MOTIONS

the problem of theflowof mercury around a sphere can be obtained from
the solution of the analogous problem of flow of water by a simple
rescaling of coordinates and velocities; the sphere diameter and the water
velocity should be chosen so as to provide the same Reynolds number.
In principle, a steady flow v0(r), as solution to the Navier-Stokes
equation, exists for any value of the Reynolds number. However,
experiments and mathematical analysis of particular cases have shown
that such flow is not stable for any value of Re. When, due to the loss of
stability, a regular steady velocity field turns into a tangled unsteady one
(or steady only in the mean), it is said that a transition from laminar
motion to the turbulent one occurs.
Formally, stability analysis can be accomplished as follows (Landau
and Lifshitz, 1959). First, a steady solution v0(r; Re) of the Navier-Stokes
equation
( v o - V ) v 0 = - v ( - j + K*-'Av 0 ,
Vv0 = 0 .
is found (as a rule, in analytical form with rare exceptions of numerical
analysis), where p and p are the fluid pressure and density, respectively.
Then weak perturbations v, (/, r, Re) and p, (t, r, Re) are introduced which
are described by a linearized equation with coefficients dependent on
v 0 (r):

—!■ + (v0 • V)v, + (v, • V)v0 = - V dt
p

+ vAv, .

Since coefficients of this equation do not depend on time, the time
dependence of the solution is given by
v, = f(r)exp[y/ + /(w, t + tpt)t].
The growth rate y and frequency eo of the developingfloware functions of
the Reynolds number. The value of Re for which y crosses zero and
becomes positive is called the critical Reynolds number, Re„.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

170

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

In contrast to the growth rate and the frequency determined by the
linearized Navier-Stokes equation, the phase 40, of the perturbation
remains undetermined and depends on the random initial conditions.
This situation is expressed by saying that the flow has acquired one more
degree of freedom. We emphasize that the basic steady flow has no
degrees of freedom. This is a freedom won by chance!
Nonlinear effects eventually suppress the growth of v,, i.e., y vanishes.
However, w, can remain non-vanishing and what arises is a periodic
flow, stable for a given value of Re. With further increasing Reynolds
number, thisflowbecomes unstable too. This new perturbation gives rise
to a second frequency a)2, independent of tou and to a second degree of
freedom q>2. Geometrical interpretation of this flow is a path which winds
around a torus with the frequency w, corresponding to the rotation along
the large circle and o>2 being the frequency of rotation along the small cir­
cle. When these frequencies are incommensurate, the trajectory is
unclosed.
L. Landau in 1944 and E. Hopf in 1948 have independently proposed
the hypothesis (see Landau and Lifshitz, 1959) that for further increase of
the Reynolds number, new frequencies and new degrees of freedom
(phases) will appear according to this very scheme. The difference
between subsequent critical Reynolds numbers decreases along this
sequence, and the scale of every new mode of motion is smaller than that
of the preceding one, i.e., the flow becomes more and more tangled and
turbulent. According to this model, turbulence is actually a superposition
of a large number of modes with independent (and incommensurate)
frequencies and random phases. We see that chance plays a decisive role
in the Landau-Hopf scheme. Nonlinearity is invoked here only in order
to saturate every next periodic perturbation. Actually, nonlinear effects
can play a more important role and can even be fatal for this model. The
point is that the interaction between a newborn mode with frequency,
e.g., co2 and the preceeding periodic motion with frequency o>, can lead to
synchronization of these modes with locking of the mode a)2 by the mode
fo>,, thus producing a one-frequency periodicflowwith frequency w,. The
theory of dynamic systems predicts that such synchronizing is possible
for a wide range of relevant parameters. However, the Landau-Hopf

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

RANDOM HYDRODYNAMIC MOTIONS

171

scenario of the route to turbulence is not entirely rejected and in principle
flows can be made turbulent through random excitation of new degrees of
freedom.
Nonlinear effects can destroy quasi-periodic regimes, not only by
simplifying them by synchronizing modes but also by adding complexity
when in the phase space of the system a strange attractor appears, i.e., the
attracting set on which the trajectories are very tangled and unstable. As
shown by Ruelle and Takens (1971), a strange attractor cannot appear on
a two-dimensional torus (unstable trajectories cannot belong to a closed
two-dimensional surface!) and its appearance is possible only after the
three-periodic motion (three-torus) is destroyed.
It would seem that the Ruelle-Takens scenario of turbulent transition
is dominated by nonlinearity while chance plays a negligible role.
Actually, the possibility of stochastization is based on the high sensitivity
of the trajectory behaviour to the initial conditions. Clearly, in a stable
flow, weak modification of the initial conditions leads to weak changes of
trajectories after a finite period. In contrast, in unstable motion on a
strange attractor, any initial inaccuracy in fixing the initial conditions
grows exponentially. Therefore, when the initial conditions are exactly
fixed, the behaviour of the system is absolutely predictable and free of
chaos. The point is that uncontrollable weak initial uncertainty turns into
unpredictability of the trajectories' behaviour after a finite time. Thus,
an ultimate random behaviour is a consequence of strong enhancement
of the initial uncertainties.

7.3. THE DEVELOPED TURBULENCE
For sufficiently large Reynolds numbers, practically every three-dimen­
sional hydrodynamic flow becomes turbulent. Properties of the deve­
loped turbulence are independent of the particular way of turbulent
transition and therefore can be understood from very general considera­
tions. This approach was first proposed by L. Richardson and acquired
clear quantitative presentation in the works of A.N. Kolmogorov and
A.S. Obukhov (see Monin and Yaglom, 1971; Landau and Lifshitz,
1959).
According to this classical theory, the turbulence is driven, i.e., the

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

172

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

energy is injected, at some basic scale /. The reader can imagine a liquid
stirred by blades of diameter / comparable to the size of the volume
occupied by the liquid. After the period l/vh where v, is the velocity at the
scale /, because of strong nonlinear interactions a basic vortex gives rise
to vortices of half this scale. Say, for the vortex flow vx = v, sin y/l,
vy = v, sin x/l, the nonlinear term ((v • V)v)x ~ vy dvjdy in the NavierStokes equation gives rise to the motion of the scale reduced by a factor of
two and of an amplitude comparable to vt. The resulting pair of vortices
is subject to the same nonlinear effects and they disintegrate into four
vortices, etc. The large value of the Reynolds number
Re = Iv/v = (l2/v)/(l/v) implies that the characteristic fragmentation
time is shorter than the dissipation time / 2 /v at the considered scale. This
allows one to suppose that the kinetic energy is not dissipated in the pro­
cess of fragmentation of vortices but is transferred from motions of larger
scales to those of smaller scales, i.e., the spectral energy flux is conserved:
e = — = — = const.,
T

X

where X is the motion scale. This relation leads to the well known
Kolmogorov spectrum
vx~(eXy\

(3)

The vortex fragmentation proceeds further until the scale of smaller
vortices becomes so small that X/vx becomes of the order of the
dissipation time X2/v at this scale. By equating these two time scales and
substituting vx oc Xui, one obtains the characteristic dissipation scale
XD^lRe~v\

(4)

The interval of scales (/, XD) is called the inertial range. The arguments
above give a qualitative form of the energy spectrum of the turbulence
(Fig. 7.2), i.e., the amount of energy per unit mass, in terms of the inverse
scale K = 2iz/X at the given scale,

173

RANDOM HYDRODYNAMIC MOTIONS

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

lnK(K. v r

! -1

<*D

In K

Fig. 7.2. The energy spectrum of the Kolmogorov turbulence.

K

\

E{K)dK~v2K~K

-2/3

The large-scale tail of the spectrum shown dashed in Fig. 7.2 depends on
the kind of forcing and is not of the universal character.
In fact, the velocity of a turbulent flow is a random function of time
and position. Therefore, a more consistent description should be in terms
of statistical averages. Then the expressions given above characterize the
autocorrelation function (u,(x + r)-u,(x)) = £(/•)«o of the velocity field
which is homogeneous and isotropic and has a vanishing mean velocity
on average. Clearly, £(0) = 1. At scales below XD the velocity field is
regular, i.e., the autocorrelation function behaves as £ = 1 — \/2(r/XT)2.
The characteristic scale XT (the Taylor microscale) that appears here is
determined by the second derivative of the autocorrelation function,
XT = [—£"(0)]_l/2, and characterizes only the scale of autocorrelation.
The inertial range, where £ — 1 ~ r2/i, ends at the scale XD which is much
smaller than kT.

174

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

A straightforward interpretation of the given picture of turbulence
implies that turbulence can be represented as an ensemble of approxi­
mately {l/XDf ~ Re9/A independent vortices, or, in other words, degrees of
freedom. In fact, this picture is excessively simplified. The vortices can
be mutually dependent or correlated, and the system can possess a
strange attractor whose dimension can be large but still smaller than
Re9/*. Determining the number of degrees of freedom remains one of the
most interesting problems of the theory of turbulence.

7.4. INTERNAL STRUCTURE AND FRACTAL PROPERTIES OF
DEVELOPED TURBULENCE
The Kolmogorov spectrum and its corresponding autocorrelation func­
tion of the velocity field are in full agreement with the experimental data
on laboratory and atmospheric turbulence (see, e.g., Monin and Yaglom,
1971).
However, a naive extrapolation of the Kolmogorov scaling law to
higher statistical moments,
(^...t^-A"3,

kp<k<l

proves to be incorrect! The discussion of the corresponding experimental
results and the theoretical considerations are presented by Frisch (1985).
According to the experiments, what is observed is the index £, shown in
Fig. 7.3 obtained for Re = 852 by Anselment et al. (1970), rather than
the index p/3 as expected from the Kolmogorov law. This result can be
presented in a more formal way as follows (Frisch and Parisi, 1985).
The Kolmogorov law vx~ A1/3 implies that the velocity field has 1/3
derivative, in the sense of Holder, in the limit A —► 0, i.e., for Re — 0. In
reality, the number of the Holder derivatives is not a spatially uniform
value. Denoted by S(a) the set of positions where the velocity field has
less than a derivatives. Let d(o) be the Hausdorff dimension of the set S
(see Chapter 5). The probability that for |x — y| -» 0 the difference
)v(x) — v(y)| is of the order of |x — y|° is equal to the ratio of the volume
of the set S(a) to the volume of the whole space, i.e., to |x — y\3~d. Hence,

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

RANDOM HYDRODYNAMIC MOTIONS

1 75

1

Fig. 7.3. The behaviour of higher moments of turbulence (dashed line) deviates from the
Gaussian-Kolmogorovian picture (solid line).

Estimating this integral by the saddle-point method, one obtains
C, = min [pa+ 3- d(a)].

(5)

a

This estimate allows one to find the dimension of the point set from the
observed values of £„ where the velocity field has less than a derivatives,
d = 3 — min ((p — pa) (see Fig. 5.6). This dependence of don a should
p

be interpreted in the following way. The majority of the positions in the
order of the Holder derivative is close to 1 / 3 . There are some positions at
which the order of the Holder derivative is lower, down to 1/10, and
some positions where the velocity field is almost smooth with the Holder
derivative being of the order 0.9. Thus, the simplified (Kolmogorov)
picture levels off and hides a differential richness of the turbulent
velocity field in the limit of the infinitely large Reynolds number.

176

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

In physical terms, these results imply that the homogeneous and
isotropic turbulence is structured. Some degree of the structuredness is
suggested by the very picture of the hierarchy appearing and the
fragmenting vortices. Apparently, the autocorrelation function behaves
differently within a vortex and near its boundary. This difference is
neglected by the Kolmogorovian approach. And this difference is a
manifestation of intermittency.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

7.5. TEMPERATURE SPOTS IN RANDOM FLOW
Studies of the coherent structures in turbulent flows are associated with
complicated and intriguing problems which are now a subject of intense
research (see, e.g., Dold and Eckmann, 1984). Here we consider a similar
but simpler problem of advection of a scalar field (temperature) by a
given random flow. The simplicity of this problem is due to its linearity
but, with respect to the effects of randomness, it seems to be no less rich
than the problem of coherent structures. In a turbulent flow of liquid with
heat sources, the temperature is a random function of time and position.
Usually the subject of analysis is the behaviour of a locally averaged
temperature. In this case the effects of random flow are reduced to
advection at the mean velocity and turbulent temperature diffusion.
However, the mean temperature does not provide a complete description
of all the effects. Even for a moderate mean temperature, temperature
fluctuations sometimes can be so high that they lead to critical pheno­
mena, e.g., local boiling.
In this discussion, we reveal and describe the causes of deviations of
the temperature from its mean value in a flow around the heat sources.
These temperature inhomogeneities have the form of spots whose scale
and lifetime are determined by the velocity field and by the Peclet
number Pe = lv/tc, where K is the molecular heat conductivity. As an
application of the developed theory, we consider boiling in an underheated liquid in a nuclear reactor (Dvorina et al., 1989).
Let us begin with the analysis of temperature fluctuations. Consider
the problem of heat conduction in a random incompressible flow whose
velocity is v(t, r) in the presence of heat sources that release the energy
pcpQ(t, r) per unit volume per unit time:

RANDOM HYDRODYNAMIC MOTIONS

—

+ (V-V)T

= KAT + Q,

7X0, r) = T0(r) .

177

(6)

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

at
The velocity field and heat sources are characterized by the average
values H and Q, respectively, and by random components with r.m.s.
deviations a„ and oQ, respectively. The temperature is also a random field
with the mean value T(t, r) and fluctuations T = T — f.
Let us consider an interesting and complicated case of large Peclet
numbers using the Lagrangian formulation of the problem. The essence
of this formulation is the following.
Put K = 0. Then the evolution of the temperature field reduces to
advection of the initial distribution by a fluid particle with additional
heating by the sources encountered along the trajectory. Thus,

nt,T)=T0&)

+jQ(t-s,$,)ds,

(7)

o
where ^, is the initial position of a particle that passes through the
considered point r at given moment t. For a given velocity field
v = d^,/dt, the Lagrangian coordinate can be obtained from the equation

$, = r-

jv(t-s,$,)ds.

(8)

0

When molecular heat conduction is taken into account, the evolution
of the temperature field cannot be described as advection along the
trajectories of fluid particles. However, one can introduce the notion of a
fictitious random path which differs from (8) by adding the term
( 2 K ) I / 2 W , to the Wiener (Brownian) random process responsible for the
random wandering associated with the diffusion process (see Chapter 3).
Then a physical solution is obtained after averaging of (7) over a bundle
of random paths that reach the position r at the moment /. Based on this
solution, one can obtain and solve deterministic equations for the mean

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

178

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

temperature and the correlation function of temperature fluctuations
(Zeldovich et ai, 1988).
As can be seen from the solution (7), there are three sources of
temperature fluctuations in the flow: fluctuations in the initial distri­
bution T0(r), fluctuations of heat supply, and the random character of the
motion of fluid particles advecting heat. The last case is understood
clearly when the reader imagines that a given position is reached by a
relatively "hot" particle that has visited a larger number of heat sources.
These temperature fluctuations are spatially organized in spots whose
characteristic size and shape are determined by the initial conditions, the
distribution of the heat sources and the correlation properties of the
velocity field.
Let us estimate the lifetime of the temperature spots. At first sight,
under the action of the turbulent heat conduction, any spot would
quickly spread out in time 12/KT, where / is the basic scale of turbulence
and KT is the turbulent heat conductivity. However, apart from being
proportional to I2, the spreading time also depends on the spot size
through D(l). For a small spot, the spreading is for a long period
determined by (small) molecular heat conductivity, and only when the
spot size becomes comparable to the basic turbulent scale / is the (strong)
turbulent conduction switched on.
An estimate of the characteristic lifetime of a spot follows from the
expression for evolution of the mean squared distance between two fluid
particles that advect heat when moving along the random paths:
dr2
— = 2D(T).
at

(9)

For a short-correlated flow, it can be shown that the diffusion coefficient
is approximated by D = K + K^r/l)2 for r«/ and D = KT for rs» /
(Molchanov et ai, 1985). Integration of (9) from some small initial
distance r0 to / yields
ts ~ — In
= — In
.
KT K + (r0//) KT KT 1 + (r 0 //) Pe

(10)

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

RANDOM HYDRODYNAM1C MOTIONS

179

Derivation of this expression implicity assumes that the velocity field has
a statistical distribution close to the Gaussian one. When this is not true
and there exist coherent structures in the flow, the lifetime of tempera­
ture spots can exceed the value given by (10). The reason for this is the
fact that within such structures, the turbulent transfer effects are replaced
by molecular heat conduction and viscosity. Therefore, for large Peclet
and Reynolds numbers these structures would have very long lifetimes.
The role of such coherent flow structures in heat conduction near various
boundary surfaces has been discussed by Kirillov (1986). We only note
that a coherent structure does not necessarily imply excess fluid
temperature. Thus, the probability of formation of temperature spots
associated with the stagnation-type flow structures is given by the
product of the probability of development of the structure and the
probability of development of temperature fluctuations in a given
structure. The appearance of coherent structures in a turbulent fluid is
associated either with transitional regimes from a laminar flow to the
turbulent one (Section 7.2) for moderate Reynolds numbers, or with
small scale effects for large Reynolds numbers (Section 7.4).
Note that the time ts given by (10) also determines the time of
diffusional spreading of a bundle of random paths, i.e., the limit of
applicability of the Lagrangian solution (7).
Now we can estimate the amplitude of temperature fluctuations.
Deviations of the temperature from the mean value, T = T — T, caused
by fluctuations in the frequency of approach of fluid particles to heat
sources and by fluctuations of heat supply are described by the second
term in the right-hand side of (7). When a path visits a large number (TV,
on average) of the sources, the deviation, being a sum of a large number
of random independent contributions, is given by
T

= < 2 T „ W , / 2 £ , + <X G T„7V , / 2 6,

(11)

where <J| and £2 are random, independent Gaussian quantities with zero
mean value and unit dispersion. Here xH is the residence time in the
vicinity of a heat source which is considered constant for simplicity.
Notice that fluctuations of xH can produce a significant effect, especially
in the case where there are flow structures near a wall. During the period

180

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

when the fluctuation V is produced, the mean temperature also grows
(due to Q) having the total increment AT = QxHN. Since the random
quantities in (11) are independent, we can replace £, and f2 by a single
random quantity £, having added the dispersions. This brings us to the
following expression for temperature fluctuations in the flow:

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

r-AT(l+f2)

— .

(12)

The independent contribution of initial temperature inhomogeneities
should be added to this expression.
We emphasize that we have not assumed that the fluctuations of the
heat supply are Gaussian. The Gaussian distribution of T' arises because
this is a sum of a large number of random contributions, i.e., because a
fluid particle visits the places with various values of the random quantity
Q several times. When the distribution of Q — Q strongly differs from
the Gaussian one and N is not very large, the expression (11) ceases to be
applicable at least because the Gaussian distribution cannot develop. In
this case T is determined by the maximal value of Q encountered along a
trajectory. In other words, a strong deviation of heat supply leads to the
formation of a pronounced temperature spot whose lifetime is ts.
The average number of approaches of a fluid particle to the heat
sources can be estimated as the ratio of the circulation time xp of travel of
the fluid along the system of heat sources to the time of random walk
between the neighbouring sources:

P/KT

It is presumed here that the lifetime (10) of temperature spots exceeds the
circulation time. Substitution of (13) into (12) gives the r.m.s. tempera­
ture deviation:

^-Af(t+|)'"(^)"!.

04)

RANDOM HYDRODYNAMIC MOTIONS

181

The turbulent temperature conductivity can be estimated, e.g., according
to the mixing length theory as KT = eloD, where e = 0.3 + 0.01 is the
numerical coefficient. The circulation time is, evidently, T„ = L/u.
In the opposite case, for ts < TP we have N ~ T, (KT/12) and in (12) one
should not consider the total increment of the temperature but rather the
increment produced in the period t/.(AT), = ATtJt. Then

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

_/
a2Q\xl1/
aT = AT\l+^-\
(in

Pe

\

.

(15)

Many subsequent circulations of the fluid through the considered
volume Fcan be considered as independent trials. Therefore, the number
of realizations of the random quantity £ in (14) depends not only on the
number of independent turbulent cells within the volume V, but also on
the number of fluid circulations which leads to the increase of the
effective volume. The random quantity £ can acquire generally an
arbitrarily large value. But it is clear that only those events are realizable
for which the product of their probability P(£ > &) and the total number
of independent trials is of order unity, i.e., P^/x^^V/l3) ~ 1, where t is
the duration of the experiment and xp is the time of a single circulation.
Substituting the Gaussian distribution of £ leads to the relation

for the standard deviation. This allows one to estimate the maximal
amplitude of the temperature fluctuation during the total duration of the
experiment:

As an example, consider the phenomenon of underheated boiling; this
phenomenon is important for the problem of the safety of nuclear

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

182

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

reactors (Tong, 1981). This problem is, in turn, associated with the
estimation of the required amount of material for the envelops of the
heating elements.
The underlined boiling is the liquid boiling at the surface of the heating
elements when the liquid temperature outside a thin layer at the surface
is below the boiling point. In contrast to the one-phase convective flows,
the underheated boiling leads to the formation of vapour bubbles and,
thus, stronger temperature perturbations and to the activation of
exchange processes, e.g., the deposit of the products of corrosion. The
underheated boiling produces a thermally non-equilibrium two-phase
flow which is far from thermal equilibrium with coexisting vapour
bubbles and the liquid whose temperature is below the boiling point.
A random character of boiling can be naturally associated with
temperature fluctuations in a flow of the heat-transfer agent. For orderof-magnitude estimates of the parameters of temperature spots we adopt
the following characteristic parameters typical of the problem of water
cooling of a system of heating rods: Pe = 7 X 104, / = 10 _2 m,
L = 2.5 m, u = 1 rns"1, aju = 0.1, e = 0.3. Then the ratio of the
lifetime of a temperature spot to the crossing time is given by
t,
1/ M
- =
InPe^
TP
3La,

1.5.

Thus, all the spots survive during the time of the passing of water through
the system of heating elements.
Temperature fluctuations associated with randomness of the flow can
be obtained by putting aQ = 0 in (14) and by adopting a smooth initial
temperature distribution. They turn out to be considerable:

This ratio decreases with decreasing "equivalent diameter" of the system
/ and decreasing of the ratio u/av. For instance, for / = 3X10" 3 m we

RANDOM HVDRODYNAM1C MOTIONS

183

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

obtain aT/AT = 0.2. Notice that initial temperature inhomogeneities
and heat supply fluctuations can produce comparable temperature
fluctuations (Tong, 1981).
Let us estimate the number n of bubbles in a given fluid volume V.
Since the temperature fluctuations obey the Gaussian statistical law, it is
sufficient to estimate the number of crossings of the level T, — T by
the Gaussian field T, where Ts is the boiling point. Denoting
& = (Ts— T)/aTwe have for large £ :

M=——,£em~)
(2TT/)3

V

(18)

2/

(Nosko, 1969). This function of £, is maximum for £ = 2 1/2 . For smaller
4 one can approximate fi by the number of turbulent cells within the vo­
lume V, i.e., the whole fluid is boiling. If expression (17) is applicable, this
implies that total boiling occurs when the average liquid temperature is
1.5 times smaller than the boiling temperature.

CHAPTER

.

EIGHT

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF
INTERMITTENCY

We have already mentioned intermittency in the discussions above.
Intermittency plays an essential role in the considered aspects of
applications of the probability theory to physics. For instance, in
intermittent distributions of matter, its mass is mainly concentrated
within widely spaced concentrations in which the density exceeds the
average one. Such kind of matter distribution is characteristic of the
universe where the density within stars and planets is incomparably
greater than the average density of galaxies while the latter is much
greater than the average density of the universe.
This chapter is devoted to some elementary questions and this
discussion helps us to reveal the nature of intermittency and introduce
relevant concepts. We begin with the discussion of a random quantity
and proceed to that of intermittency in a random field. The chapter
concludes with the discussion of the role of nonlinearity.
8.1. INTERMITTENCY OF A RANDOM QUANTITY
In practically every physical experiment a random quantity <J appears.
Usually such random quantities are believed to be distributed according
to the normal, or Gaussian, law and thus completely determined by the
mean value (£) and the dispersion a1. Majority of the values of the
random quantity are close to the mean value and reside within the region
whose radius is of the order of the r.m.s. deviation equal to a, i.e., to the
square-root of the dispersion. The quantity £ can acquire values that
strongly differ from (£) but such strong deviations have very low
probability indeed. This property is the basis for the success of the least
185

186

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

squares method, which is widely used in processing experimental data.
The Gaussian random quantities usually arise as a sum of a large number
of small, independent or weakly inter-dependent random variables which
are approximately identically distributed. The Gaussian character of
such sums is guaranteed by the central limit theorem.
However, consider a random quantity of the multiplication type which
is a product of a large number of identically distributed independent
random quantities. Let £j,j = 1 , . . . , N, acquire the values 0 and 2 with
equal probabilities 1/2. Then the random quantity given by the product
/v

j-i

vanishes for almost all realizations of £,. The only exception is the one
realization where all <J, are equal to 2. The probability for this unique rea­
lization is very low: for large N, it is given by 2~N. On the other hand, the
value of £ for this realization is very high and is equal to 2N.
This random quantity E, has an amazing statistical distribution. This is
very different from the Gaussian one. All possible values of £ are zeros
except a unique one which is very large. However, this very value
determines the mean value of the random quantity:
0 + 0 + 0 + .. . + 0 + 2 "
2N

1.

, 2,v
sum of squared realizatons 0 + 0 + .. . + 0 + 22N
Z)=
7^—,—-—:
=
number of realizations

2"

t v

sum of all realizatons
number of realizations

The mean square

exponentially grows with increasing N. The higher moments
(<?3), (?), • • • > (?) = 2(""l)Argrow still stronger. The rate of growth of the
statistical moments with N is given by

.lofo(0

y,m-*irNL-p-i-

0)

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF INTERMITTENCY

187

We see that the growth rate also grows with the order of the moment, p. In
the limit p -*■ oo we have yp-+ p.
Random quantities of the considered type are called intermittent
random quantities. We emphasize that this notion is associated with large
values of N, i.e., with large numbers of multipliers. Similar to a Gaussian
random quantity which is typical of the sum of many random numbers,
the intermittent random quantity seems to be typically a result of the
multiplication of many random numbers.
The simple example considered above may seem to degenerate due to
the dominance of zeros in £,-. However, the presence of intermittency is
independent of these zeros. Consider another random quantity £,
distributed around unity. Then the logarithm of the product of realiza­
tions,
lnC = lnC,+lnt 2 + . . . + l n C
is a sum of many random numbers distributed around zero. Therefore,
for large N we have ln£ ~ NU2n, where n is a Gaussian random quantity
with zero mean value. Thus,
C~

e\p(Nl/2n)

which is a log-normal distribution. The quantity n has values mainly
from the interval (— fia, pa), where a is the standard deviation of n and
p. ~ 1 is a numerical coefficient. For n < 0, the value of £ is exponentially
close to zero, while for n > 0 values of £ are large, of the order of
exp(N1/2a). The mean value of a log-normal quantity is
( 0 = jz(r,Mr,)dr,

= |exp«2)exp(-^^~ exp^.

In contrast to an individual realization, the mean value grows monot­
onously as an exponential function of N. Higher statistical moments also
grow exponentially:

<C>~e*p(,'^).

188

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

The growth rate of the p-th moment is given by

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

ln(C')
, a2
y,= l i m - ^ = / > 2 -

(2)

and grows infinitely with p.
Even though here the contrast between an individual realization and
the averaged characteristics is not so pronounced as in the former
example, this more realistic example preserves all the typical features of
intermittency.
Strictly speaking, evaluation of the statistical moments in the latter
example based on the log-normal distribution, which is only an asymp­
totic distribution, is not completely consistent (Novikov, 1971; Man­
delbrot, 1972). It is more correct to evaluate first (C)for any given TV and
only then take the limit N -* oo. However, the values of t\ of the order of
p2a2Nl/2 make a dominant contribution to the integral (C), while a true
distribution of r\ is close to the Gaussian one for |>/| < cNul, where c is a
constant to be determined by the particular true distribution of tj.
Therefore, the expression (2) is valid when p2a2 < c, i.e., when p2a2 is
sufficiently small. When the individual multipliers C( do not acquire large
values with considerable probability, the growth rate must be close to (2)
even for large values of p2a2. Notice that this difficulty associated with
an enhanced influence of rare strong deviations does not arise in the
evaluation of moments of an additive random quantity. This is because
the log-normal distribution for a multiplicative random quantity is not as
universal as the normal Gaussian distribution of an additive one. In this
sense, analysis of a multiplicative random quantity cannot be reduced to
simply taking the logarithm.
8.2. EVOLUTION OF A RANDOM QUANTITY
Additive random quantities naturally arise in the processing of experi­
mental data. Meanwhile, multiplicative random quantities arise in an
equally natural way in the solution of evolutionary problems, where N
plays the role of time. Of course, some evolutionary problems generate

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF INTERMITTENCY

189

additive random quantities as well. Consider a simple example of
evolution of f governed by the equation

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

dp

where £(/) is the random quantity with, say, Gaussian distribution with
dispersion a1 and with rapid decay of time correlation. For the sake of
simplicity consider £ that renovates after every period of duration r, i.e.,
over the time intervals [0, T), [T, 2T), . . . its values are independent and
identically distributed. Then the solution is given by a time integral
which reduces to a sum of independent random terms. For t » x the
central limit theorem applies to this sum, i.e.,*

Ht)~{€)t + ™(^j'\,
where n is the Gaussian quantity with zero mean value and unit
dispersion.
When (£) J= 0, the true solution approaches the mean value with the
growth of t, i.e., self-averaging occurs. For (<j;) = 0 we see that (\f>) = 0
and the solution normalized by t'/2 converges to a limit distribution,
Gaussian in this case. The relative strength of fluctuations does not grow
with time and even decreases for (<!;) ^ 0. Formally, this property can be
expressed as splitting of higher moments,

<i*r>~<wwr>
i.e., higher moments reduce to products of the lower ones. In other words,
for large /, knowledge of the mean value and mean square is sufficient for
a full description of \p.

* This result is valid even for much less restrictive properties of £ (Monin and Yaglom,
1967; Taylor, 1921).

190

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

However, these two averages are obviously insufficient for the descrip­
tion of solutions to an evolutionary equation of unstable type,

whose solutions have the multiplicative nature:

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

(

*(/) = ^o exp

(«+l)T

i(s)ds tzrYi
i.

n-o

ex

&s)ds'

P
J

.e.,
ln^ 72?(Z)t + ra(^j

t],

(4)

This solution is, thus, an intermittent random quantity. The fluctua­
tions of \(/(t) grow with time as exp[x<r(t/x)l/2r]]. More exactly, this
exponential function describes the growth of the ratio of two individual
realizations of \p which correspond to two different realizations of rj. Now
the mean value of £ and its mean square characterize only the logarithm
of ^ at large times.
We stress again that, strictly speaking, expression (4) is suitable for
evaluating the mean values (f) only for small values of TO. When the pro­
duct xa tends to zero, the second term on the right-hand side of (4) does
not tend to zero or to infinity only when the standard deviation a of £, is
related to the renovation time x by a ~ x~1/2. This case is known as short
time-correlations approximation. In this case, £(/) — (£) is proportional
to the Brownian (Wiener) random process W, for which (W,) = 0 and
(W]) = t. We often use this approximation below and in Section 8.4 we
define in a more precise way the limiting transition x -* 0.
8.3. A RANDOM MEDIUM
The phenomenon of intermittency, which manifests itself as the occur­
rence of rare but intense peaks in the behaviour of a random quantity,

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF INTERM1TTENCY

191

looks to be highly degenerated and rare and thus of no importance for,
e.g., an ordinary stockbroker. However, some hardly probable events
lead to such catastrophic consequences that they dramatically change
even everyday life.
Random media (random fields) that consist of a continuum of random
quantities offer much wider possibilities for the realization of rare
events.
Consider for example a medium with a force field described by a
random potential U(x, a>) (Zeldovich et al., 1985). The parameter co
enumerates the realizations of the potential so that for a fixed o) the
potential is an ordinary deterministic function of position. Specifically,
consider U with a Gaussian distribution with zero mean value and the
dispersion a2. The potential is a random field of an additive type and it
can be represented as a series of unphased Fourier modes.
In such a potential the matter has the equilibrium concentration given
by the Boltzmann lav/3

f£)

n =/i„expl - — I.

(5)

This distribution is not Gaussian because the dependence on U is
nonlinear. This is obvious for o/kT^z 1 but it would seem natural that for
o/kT « 1 the distribution is linear:

n=n 1

°{ -^)'

{n)X "o

and the Gaussian statistics prevail.
Indeed, let us find the value of the potential corresponding to the most
probable concentration of the matter. Since the probability density of n is
given by
p(n(U)) = « 0 exp( - — )p(U) = « 0 exp( - — - — j ,

b

Such a law arises not only in thermodynamics but also in chemical kinetics where the
activation energy plays the role of U.

192

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

its maximum value p^ = HQ exp(o2/2k2T2)
is reached for U^/a
= —o/kT. However, a detailed analysis of higher statistical moments
a2

(/i) = «oexp- 2 i k 2 7 , 2 .

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

a2
(« 2 ) ,/2 = n 0 exp 2 2 '
kT

shows that the larger their order is, the larger they are: ( « 2 ) » ( « ) 2 ,
( « 4 ) » («2)2, etc. In other words, successive mean values are determined
not by the most probable value of n, o/kT, but rather by pU2o/kT.
Hence, the linear approximation does not provide a field description
even for small values of o/kT. This progressive growth of statistical
moments with their order can be explained only by a much more
pronounced dominance of rare intense peaks in the concentration
distribution. In principle, high peaks are also present in the Gaussian
potential where (U")1'1' grows as pu2. But this kind of growth is by far
weaker than the corresponding exponential growth of the moments of the
concentration. What is important is the fact that weak traces of
intermittency in the Gaussian potential, negligible by themselves, are
greatly enhanced and become dominant in the distribution of the
concentration (5) that depends nonlinearly on U.
On the other hand, the concentration is a solution to the following
linear equation with a random coefficient v (velocity field)
V(KV« - nv) = 0 ,

which is the stationary diffusion equation for a moving medium and
where in the mobility approximation we have v = (ic/kT)VU, with K as
the diffusion coefficient. This fact makes the basic difference between the
intermittent structures and the structures which are the subject of

193

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF INTERMITTENCY

synergetics and which arise due to processes described by nonlinear
equations.
Linear scalar equations with random breeding and diffusion are typical
of a number of problems from biology and kinetics of chemical and
nuclear reactions (Mikhailov and Uporov, 1984). Zeldovich (1983) also
considers some relevant nonlinear problems. Let us consider the pheno­
menon of intermittency using a simple equation

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

at

(6)
Wx, 0) = Mx),
as an example. Here the potential U has the Gaussian distribution with a
certain characteristic scale /of decay of spatial correlations. A solution to
equation (6) can be written (Kac, 1973; Gelfand and Yaglom, 1956) in a
form similar to the form of the solution of the simpler diffusionless
equation (3):

*(x, /) = A/J exp f jUi&dsJ

Mts)

,

(7)

where the symbol Mx denotes averaging over all trajectories of the
Brownian motion ^(x) = (2/c)l/2W,(x) that begin at the position £, at the
moment s = 0 and reach the position x at the moment s = t.
For any bounded non-negative initial function ^ 0 ( x ) an< l f° r an Y k>0,
the solution (7) with probability one asymptotically, for / -► oo, grows as
cxp[6ta2 ln(kt/l2)>/2]. To be more exact, there exists a finite limit
lim

^ 7 7 7 7 = (6<T2)'/2 •

<-«>t(\nkt/l2)m

W

This kind of time dependence is explained by the fact that the
dominant contribution to solution (7) is made by that trajectory which

194

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

quickly encounters a high maximum of the potential. Let us estimate the
height of this maximum. The region of the radius R (with R »I) contains
~ (R/lj* correlation cells. The probability that the potential reaches a
given value U0 in the cells is given by P~ exp(— Ul/la1). The condition
P(R/l)3 ~ 1 leads to the estimate

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

R
max U ~ (I 6CT2 In —

For a typical trajectory we have R/l~ (Kt/l2)1'2 and we obtain a superexponential growth ^ ~ exp[f(3ff2 ln(/tf//2)l/2)] even for a typical trajec­
tory. In fact, still greater contribution does not come from a typical
trajectory but rather from a less probable one called (by I.M. Lifshitz) the
optimal trajectory. The shift from the initial position along the optimal
trajectory is much greater, of the order of / ? / / ~ tct in a period /; due to
this, the small statistical weight of this trajectory is compensated by a
large factor max £/(Zeldovich et ai, 1985).
We note that although the limiting value (8) is independent of
molecular diffusivity, for K = 0 the solution can only grow exponentially,
as it follows from (6). This peculiarity is due to the dependence on K of
the time 12/K of the establishment of the super-exponential regime. Thus,
the result depends on the order of two subsequent limiting transitions,
either t -* oo and then K -+ 0, or K -»• 0 and then t -* oo. Note also that the
result (8) should not be interpreted as suggesting that diffusion K
enhances the growth of ^. A more detailed analysis (Zeldovich et ai,
1987) shows that, taking into account further terms of expansion in
diffusivity, the growth rate of $ becomes a decreasing function of K.
Even for K = 0, the higher statistical moments of the field \p behave
super-exponentially. Indeed,
(^"(x, /)> = <exp(ut/0)* 0 ' = *0Pexp

m-

The same law describes the evolution for / -* oo and K / 0 as well (see
Zeldovich et al., 1985). Thus, the moments (ipp)i'1' grow much faster than
the field ^ itself and the growth rate grows with the moment order. This

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF INTERMITTENCY

195

progressive growth of statistical moments is associated again with the
presence of sharp peaks in the solution \f/(x, t), i.e., with the intermittency
of the distribution of the field yp. These peaks are present in any
realization of the solution that corresponds to a given realization of the
potential. In their positions they coincide with rare and high maxima of
the potential U. For comparison, note that in the evolution of a random
quantity, similar peaks appear only in some rare realizations.
Above we have considered an infinite medium. For a finite volume,
the result reads \p ~ exp(max U, t), where max C/is the random quantity,
e.g., of the Gaussian type. For a Gaussian potential, the moments still
grow as exp(/72(T2f 2 /2). However, if the potential is bounded from above0
by some value V, the result is ^ nux ~ (\p")Up ~ exp Ut, p » 1, i.e., the
intermittency disappears from the leading order. Thus, the phenomenon
of intermittency in a steady potential is associated with the presence of an
infinite tail in its statistical distribution which seems to be unphysical.
More realistic is the development of intermittency in a potential
(medium) that depends on time and is stationary only on the average. It is
expected in this case that the solution \p grows less rapidly, viz., as an ex­
ponential function of time because any maximal value of the potential
persists for a finite period.
8.4. THE SHORT-CORRELATED RANDOM MEDIUM
In this section we turn our attention to the media which are stationary
only on average. First, consider the ways of describing such media.
Usually this description is accomplished in terms of the mean and r.m.s.
characteristics of, e.g., dielectric permeability or — in magnetohydrodynamics — the mean helicity. A more detailed description assumes that
the correlation tensor of fluctuations in a random medium is given or
only some of its parameters are prescribed. For instance, when the
Kolmogorov turbulence is mentioned, it is usually understood that the
spectral index is given within the inertial range. Such description is
insufficient for our purposes. When we are interested in the hardly
probable states of the field that evolves in a random medium, we should
c

The effective upper limit of the potential in quantum theory can be associated with
Pauli's exclusion principle.

196

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

also be capable of describing the corresponding hardly probable states of
the medium itself. This task is accomplished in the easiest way in the case
of a medium which is extremely non-stationary. We speak of such media
as short-correlated (in time).
To be specific, we describe a short-correlated potential U. This can be
conveniently considered as a limiting case of a sequence of potentials
U*(t, x) which do not vary with time during periods of duration At:
(0, At), (At, 2At), . . . , and are independent at different periods. In the
limit At -» 0 we have
((U(x, t) - ((/)) (l/(y, f) - (U))) = 2S(t - /') V(x, y).

(9)

Following the normalization condition (U*)2At = 1, for small At, the
potential deviates from its mean value by approximately (At)'1'2.
Independence of the function V(x, y) on time implies that the potential is
stationary on average.
The relation (9) describes our potential in terms of the correlation
tensor. However, this is an incomplete description. Indeed, expression
(9) allows us to evaluate the correlators of the type (U(x,tx)
U(x,t2)...
U(x,tn)), denned at a single point, because under natural assumptions
the short-correlated potential has the Gaussian distribution in time. In
contrast, higher spatial correlations of the potential for separated points
generally do not split into products of pair correlations and they cannot
be reduced to (9). In more complicated situations, when the medium is
not short-correlated, the Gaussian approximation cannot be applied to
time-correlations as well (see, e.g., Molchanov et ai, (1985)).
This concept of short-correlated medium (i.e., short-correlated poten­
tial or other characteristics of the medium), which is so convenient for
our purposes, is intrinsically connected with concepts of white noise and
the Wiener process.
The Wiener (Brownian) random process is naturally associated with
diffusion phenomena. However, here we also intend to use the Wiener
process to specify potentials that would describe random interactions.
The non-standard nature of this situation is underlined even by the
adopted terminology: a mathematical concept that arises in the analysis

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF INTERMITTENCY

197

of a trajectory of the Brownian particle now appears as, e.g., the velocity
in the transfer equation! The point is that the properties of a random me­
dium (e.g., the velocity), in which transfer, diffusion or self-excitation of
a scalar (impurity) or vector (vorticity or magnetic field) occurs, enter the
transfer equation as coefficients, just as the potential enters the Schrodinger equation. In this sense, our problem principally differs from
Langevin's problem where the equation of motion includes a given
random force (energy source). In our case the potential plays the role of a
"driving belt" that connects energy sources with a self-exciting admix­
ture through the characteristics of the medium.
The method of describing the short-correlated random process through
the Wiener one can also be applied to the description of random media.
We adopt the convention that at every position a particular Wiener
process is given so that the whole set of these processes should be
described as a function of / and x: W,(x). Then the random shortcorrelated potential is given by
U(t,X,CO)=

yjff

.

The Wiener processes at different positions x and y can be correlated.
A full description of the random medium demands that this correlation
should be somehow characterized. Fortunately, in the majority of
interesting cases, it is important that the correlation is strong only for
nearby positions but it rapidly weakens with growing separation. This
allows one to adopt a kind of discretization of space when it is considered
that the properties of a random medium are uniform within the spatial
correlation cells of certain correlation size while they are independent in
different cells. In this case the Wiener process can be replaced by its
finite-dimensional analogue, i.e., random wandering over a lattice.
Sometimes, one is also forced to adopt time discretization.
The random media in which the property (9) is observed are usually
called <J-correlated. Having in mind the further elucidation of this
concept as described above, we adopt the notion of a short-correlated
medium.

198

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

8.5. INTERMITTENCY IN NON-STATIONARY MEDIUM
Consider the simple case of an extremely non-stationary potential
represented by a white noise in time with independent values for
different spatial cells of a certain correlation scale:

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

U(t,x,o)) =

r-dW,
yjo—r-,
at

where W, is the Wiener process. Adopting this form of generalized
potential, we consider equation (6) as a finite-difference equation in
time, i.e., it is presumed that the limit of infinitesimal correlation time of
the potential is first taken and then the limit At -»■ 0 in (6). This order of
the limits corresponds to the approach of Ito (1946). Otherwise, one can
adopt the approach of Stratonovich (1966), which in this case corre­
sponds to the reverse order of the indicated limit transitions. The
conclusion about the presence of intermittency does not depend on the
order of the adopted approach.
Equation (6) can be solved explicitly neglecting diffusion, i.e., for
K = 0, to give
*(x^£B) = * o ( x ) e x p ( V f f ^ - y ) -

0°)

The additional factor exp (—at/2) is due to the fact, as pointed out by Ito,
that the correct differentiation of the Wiener process requires that its
squared differential is also taken into account and that (d\V)2 = dt(see,
e.g., Gikhman and Skorokhod, 1965).
A typical value of the process W, is of the order ti/2 for large t, i.e., with
the probability solution (10) which decays as exp(—at/2) at any point.
However, at a small probability the Wiener process acquires values
which are arbitrarily larger than tl/2. Therefore, the solution undoubtedly
possesses rare but intense peaks against the decaying background.
This can also be verified through the evaluation of high statistical
moments of the solution. Suppose that the initial distribution ^ 0 ( x ) is
independent of U or that ^ 0 ( x ) is a deterministic function. Applying the

199

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF INTERMITTENCY

relation
(exp(PyfoW,)) = explp2 — j ,
we obtain

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

<*'>-«>exp[^fi>4
i.e., the rate of exponential growth yp/p increases with the moment order
as a(p — l)/2. Thus, we see that a typical realization of the random field
^■(x, /) decays as exp(—at/2), the mean value (p = 1) always coincides
with (^ 0 ), the mean square grows as exp(at/2), the fourth moment
increases as exp(6ff/)> etc.
This growth of moments is explained by the significant contribution of
rare events. In other words, the complete set of realizations ^(x, t, (o)
contains the realizations that grow at some positions. As can be seen from
the form of (10) and the properties of the Wiener process, these rare func­
tions are growing only for a finite time.
Intermittency leads to a very peculiar situation: even though ergodicity
is preserved in intermittent media, practical application of the ergodic
theorem to evaluate the averages over finite volumes is impossible. When
considering a large but finite volume or a localized initial distribution
^ 0 (x), we encounter a very distinctive violation of ergodicity understood
as coincidence of the averages over the statistical ensemble and spatial
(sample) averages.
In contrast to statistical moments, in a finite volume V sample
averages decay with unit probability:

VP = - ]4>S(x)expyPy[0W,(x) - p—jd\

^exp[-p—).

V

Unlike statistical moments, the volume averages are random quantities
themselves. Nevertheless, the rate of their decay yp = —pa/2 is a
deterministic quantity.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

200

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

The difference between the sample and statistical moments can be
understood in the following way. For a localized initial distribution (zero
beyond certain radius) or in a finite volume, high peaks persist only for a
finite period in the majority of realizations. Sooner or later, the
characteristic separation of these peaks becomes greater than the size of
the region occupied by the field and the peaks are present only in an ex­
ponentially small number of realizations. This low probability is suffi­
cient for the peaks to make a significant contribution to the statistical
average determined by all realizations. But the spatial average np taken
over a given realization evidently becomes insensitive to these peaks
when they become too rare. The decay time of the number of peaks is of
the order of xp \n(V/r%), where xp = 2/a(p — 1) is the characteristic time
of growth of the p-th moment and r0 is the correlation scale of the
potential. Thus, for t> T/(ln(Krjj'3), the given volume V ceases to
encompass the peaks that considerably affect the p-th sample moment.
The intermittency survives even in the presence of diffusion, at least in
the limit of small /c(Zeldovich et ai, 1987). Of course, the growth rates
now become dependent on K. For K-»0 the functions yp(*c) remain
continuous, therefore the values of 7P(K) differ for different p for small K.
When Kgrows, they vanish for certain values K2, K3, . . . . It can be shown
thaty,(K) = 0, while y(/e) < 0 for *<*<)< K2 and y(/c) = 0 for K> K^.The
dependence of yp on K for integer p can be obtained explicitly from the
moment equations. However, the fact that for p = 1 the moment (\p) is
constant while a typical realization \f/ decays for K < KQ implies that all
{yp") for p > 1 grow exponentially at least for K < KQ. Thus, for K < KQ the
intermittency is no less pronounced than for K = 0. For K> KQ, the
intermittency can be noticed only in high statistical moments (see Fig.
8.1).
The discussed properties of the growth rates are also typical of the
problem of transfer of a vector in a random medium, e.g., magnetic field
in a turbulent flow of conducting fluid (turbulent hydromagnetic
dynamo) (Molchanov et ai, 1985). The basic difference is that for
sufficiently small (magnetic) diffusivity even a typical realization of a
vector field can grow exponentially. In the case of a vector field, the peaks
correspond to the structures of the type of magnetic ropes or layers.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF INTERMITTENCY

201

Fig. 8.1. Schematic dependence of the growth rate of a scalarfieldon diffusivity. The growth
rates of the fractional moments for 1 < p < 2 arc shown by dashed lines.

8.6. STRUCTURE OF THE MOMENTS OF A SCALAR FIELD IN
RANDOM MEDIUM
In order to get a deeper insight into the phenomenon of intermittency, it
is useful to derive and analyze the equation for the moments of a random
scalar field ^(x, t) (Sokoloffand Shumkina, 1988). The term U\p in the
equation

dt

ty + KA$

(11)

that describes the evolution of \p is the main obstacle in the derivation of
these equations. Both multipliers, U and ^, include randomness which
enters ^ in a very complicated, nonlinear way, reflecting the history of
evolution. This is why equations for averaged quantities can be derived
more easily from the explicit solution of equation (11), rather than from
the equation itself, because in the solution the random behaviour is

202

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

expressed explicitly, albeit in a complicated form. The apparatus of
Wiener integrals allows such a solution to be obtained even for an
arbitrary function U(x, t).
The corresponding relation is known as the Kac-Feynman formula. It
is given by

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

UU x) = Mx ( e x p M U(ypteW,)ds)

*o(>/2^W,)J

(12)

(cf. (7)), where it is assumed that the Wiener process W, starts at the
moment / from the point x and the symbol Mx denotes the average over
such trajectories (the Wiener integral). The physical meaning of expres­
sion (12) is as follows: in the course of evolution, the field \p is
diffusionally transferred in space (the symbols W,and Mxare responsible
for this) and simultaneously grows at the rate U which varies from one
position to another (the term exp(/o Uds)). These heuristic arguments can
be given in further detail but this is not quite necessary. Indeed a
favourite peculiarity of any equation, including the differential ones, is
that, after any suspicious heuristic arguments that lead to a certain
solution, it can be validated by direct substitution into the equation and
making sure that the equation turns into an identity. For the Cauchy type
of differential equations, the solution is usually unique.
Let us do this with expression (12). Recall that the increments of the
Wiener process are independent and we can consider that it starts afresh
at any new moment. Therefore, (12) can be recast as

*(x, t +At) = M,J e x p f j

U{4teVi,)dsU{j2xV/*>t)Y

(13)

where the function \p at the moment t is substituted for the initial
distribution ^ 0 ( x )- Let us now evaluate the integrand in (13) with
accuracy up to At taking into account that WA, = 0[(At)1'2]:

>(j
expl

t/(V3toW,)<fcj
U(yf2^Ws)ds)+(y[2^WAt,t)

203

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF INTERMITTENCY

= vHx, /) + (/(x)vKx, t)At + ^- ^ ( W ^ ) , + K~^aXi

(W^), (W*,),.

oXjdXj

Since we take the limit At -+ 0, the higher-order terms can be neglected.
Now the Wiener integral on the right-hand side can be easily evaluated
and this approximation reduces the calculation of the correlators of the
Wiener process. The result reads

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

^(x, t + At) = ^(x, 0 + U(x)t(x, t)At + KAfAt.

(14)

Transposing \j/(x, /) to the left-hand side of the equation, dividing the
equation by At and taking the limit At -* 0, we recover equation (11).
The Kac-Feynman formula admits both deterministic and random
potentials U. This solution (12) can be used for deriving the evolutionary
equations for the statistical moments of the field ip. For the sake of
simplicity, we restrict ourselves to the equation of the first moment
(^(x, t)) for a short-correlated potential.
The idea behind this derivation is the following. Consider the shortcorrelated potential U as a limit, for d —■ 0, of the potentials Us which are
time-independent over the time intervals [0; S), [S; 2d), [23; 3d), ...
separately and are statistically independent at different intervals. Con­
sider also (Us) = 0. We recall that the potentials Us have typical values of
the order of <TI/2.
Let us calculate the increment ^-[x, (n + 1)3] — \p(\, n8) to the
accuracy of the order of S. This can be accomplished with the help of the
Kac-Feynman formula, just as it was done in the derivation of expression
(14) above. We should only take into account that now the potential Uis
of the order of S~"2 rather than unity. As a result, we obtain
+[x,(n +

l)S]-t(x,nd)

= ^(x, nS) Us(x, nS)d + Uj(x, nS)S2+(x, nd) + KA+(X, nd)S.

(15)

The random field ^-(x, nd) on the right-hand side of this expression was
formed during the period t < nd when the values of the potential U were
independent of Us(x, nd). Therefore, ^(x, nd) and Us(x, nd) are indepen-

204

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

dent random fields and they can be averaged separately over the
ensemble of realizations of U. This leads to
(*[x, (n + 1)<5]> - (*(x, nS)) = /cA(*(x, nS)} + Bj(x)d(,p(x, nd)),

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

where Bj(x) denotes the average {U%(x)S). Transposing, dividing by S
and taking the limit of 6 -*■ 0, we obtain the following equation for the
first moment:

dt
The equations for higher moments
m,(x„ . . . , x„ t) = (tf(x„ 0 $(x2, t)...

iKxp, 0)

can be obtained in an analogous manner and they have the form
- ^ = K(A, + . . . + A,)m, + X- X V(x„ xj)mp.

(16)

Here, A, denotes the Laplace operator in x, and V(xh x;) is the correlation
function of the potential [/defined by [cf. (9)]
(U(xh t)dt, U(Xj, t)dt) = V(xhxj)dt.

(17)

The differential dt enters twice on the left-hand side of (17) while it
appears only once on the right-hand side because the potential U is a
generalized function, viz., a white noise rather than an ordinary function.
Note that only the binary correlations of the potential enter equation
(16).
In the derivation of (16), we consider the renovation time 8 to be short
as compared to the characteristic time T by which the Wiener process is
normalized but S to be large in comparison with dt. In other words, here
we followed the Stratonovich approach. Meanwhile, in the discussion
above, the Ito approach was used. When \p is considered as bacterial

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF INTERM1TTENCY

205

density, the Stratonovich approach assumes that the bacteria reproduce
themselves instantaneously at a characteristic time much shorter than
the time of variation of the potential (the food supply). In the Ito
approach, the maturing time of a bacterium exceeds the variation time of
the potential. Comparing the two corresponding results, we see that
frequent reforms destroy the population. One can verify that the moment
equations for equation (11) of Ito's approach are the following:

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

- ^ = K(A, + . . . + A,)m, + X V(xh xj)mp.

(18)

These equations differ from (16) by the absence of the term V(Xj, x,). In
order to keep our presentation continuous, here we study equation (18).
In Chapter 9, where more specific problems of magnetic field evolution
in turbulent media are considered, we adopt a more adequate Stratono­
vich approach.
We consider the case of statistically homogeneous and isotropic
potentials where V depends only on r = |x, — x,|. Then equation (18) is
invariant with respect to the translation of the "center of mass" whose
coordinate is R = 1//>Z/L|X,-. It is convenient to introduce new co­
ordinates y, = x, — R with the origin at the "center of mass". We are
searching for translationally invariant solutions of equation (18), i.e., the
functions mp that do not depend on R.
Intermittency arises from small diffusivities K when it is natural to
employ a semi-classical approximationd for solving equation (18). The
potential £,<, V(xh x,) in equation (18) reaches its maximal value at
positions x, = x2 = x3 = . . . = xp (i.e., y, = 0) and becomes negligible
when r = \x,■ — x;| exceeds the correlation radius of the potential U. It is
natural to assume that the most rapidly growing solution of (18), which is
most interesting, is concentrated at small r. We can approximate the
function V(r) by a parabolic law
V(r) = a-br1
d

(19)

We understood the semi-classical approximation in a modern broad sense (Maslov and
Fedorjuk, 1981) that includes also the so-called oscillatory approximation.

206

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

for small r. Here a is the mean square of the potential C/and r0 = (a/b)1'2
is the correlation radius of U. Of course, the approximation (19) is valid
only for r s r0 and when the function Fdoes not include any dimensionless parameters considerably differing from unity (e.g., the hydrodynamic Reynolds number in the problem of magnetic field selfexcitation).
Substituting the approximation (19) in equation (18) yields

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

dmo

\P(P — 1)

.

■, ■

P>
a - bpp2\ \m„,
2 m

- ^ = KAm, + Y^2

(20)

where A denotes the Laplace operator in 3/wlimensional space of vectors
yi (with / = 1,2,.../?) which are restricted by If_,y, = 0; p = (S?_,,y,2)1/:2
is the distance from the origin in the 3/>-dimensional space.
Consider the solutions to equation (20) which preserve their shape, i.e.,
the eigenfunctions of the problems
\?

a\mp=

Kamp-

bpp2mp,

(21)

where y is the growth rate: w„(y„ y 2 , . . . , yp, t) = w p ( y i , . . . , yp)exp(yt).
Equation (21) is essentially the equation describing a harmonic oscillator
in 3/?-dimensional space. For solutions decaying at infinity, the leading
eigenvalue is given by
yu» =

P(P~ *> a _ 3pJ^

(22)

and the corresponding eigenfunction is

This form is applicable up to the distance/? ~ r0pin. Beyond this radius,
rhp falls off as exp(—Ap) but the attenuating rate A depends on the
detailed structure of V.

207

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF INTERMITTENCV

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

Following from (22), the intermittency is preserved only for suf­
ficiently small values of K. When considering the evolution laws of
different moments, one should compare the values of the ratios y(p)lp.
These ratios increase with p only for small K. Using (22), we can also
estimate the critical diffusivity K}P) defined so that for K < K^ the p-Xh
moment is self-excited and for K = K\P) the growth rate of the p-th
moment, y{p)(K), vanishes. Equating yo(ic) fr°m (22) to zero we obtain

,.

(p - 1)V

a2

As a function of K, the growth rate is continuous at K = 0 but it depends
on K non-analytically, as / " - y(p)(0) =
0(K)~,/2.
The eigenfunction (23) possesses the highest possible symmetry, the
rotation group in 3(p — 1 )-dimensional space. Note that only a priori the
symmetry of the rotation groups in each three-dimensional space
separately could be expected as 0(3) X 0(3) X . . . X 0(3). This
property of maximal possible symmetrization can be encountered in
other physical problems as well.
Semi-classical asymptotic forms for several higher eigenvalues and
eigenfunctions of equation (18) can be obtained easily:

a- lyficpbyN + -p\,

N«
yJKpb

while the eigenfunctions are obtained from (23) through multiplication
by combinations of Hermite polynomials with sums of order equal to N.
The evolution of an arbitrary initial spatially uniform distribution of
the p-th moment can be described with the help of an expression in the
derived eigenfunctions. The solution is dominated by the leading
eigensolution after a sufficiently long period.
Some useful information can also be obtained from the spectral
properties, i.e., from the Fourier transforms of the eigenfunctions (2)

208

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

given by

(bpV"1*

m

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

>*

f k2 (

K\'*\

V - ( T ) M ' T U ]«'. + •■+M.

where k2 = Z?_,k,2. This expression is applicable for k>p~l,2ro '.
Real potentials are always different from an idealized short-correlated
potential. In particular, there can exist a limiting value Umax such that
I U\ < ^m« with probability one. In this case, neither moment can grow at
a rate exceeding pU^. Then the expressions obtained above are
applicable only for p < pmM with
2Utm
Ana* =

1•

a
Notice that the eigenfunctions of the moment equations obtained do
not contain any scales that considerably differ from unity. This probably
implies that the intermittent distribution of the field consists of high
peaks with approximately circular cross-sections formed by the lowest
eigenfunction and connected by ridges associated with the higher
eigenfunctions. Unlike this intermittency described by the simplest
equation (11), in a more complicated example individual moments
possess more versatile structure with many characteristic scales (see
Chapter 9).
The solutions for equation (11) can be presented as
i> oc exp{y(K)t +

Zyjl},

where y(/c) is the rate of decay of a typical realization while £ is a set of
random quantities given at every position. For K -*■ 0, the decay rate
tends to —1/2 and £ converges to a set of Gaussian random quantities
uncorrelated among different positions. For non-vanishing diffusivity
the random quantities £ are essentially non-Gaussian. Indeed, for
Gaussian <j; the moments' growth rates would be given by

^"-yW + y / W ,

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF INTERM1TTENCY

209

where/is defined as the dispersion of £
Investigation of the asymptotic structure of the distribution of random
quantities £(K) for small K is the subject of further studies in relation to
equation (11).

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

8.7. VORTICITY AND DEFORMATIONS IN A FLOW OF
INCOMPRESSIBLE FLUID
We have discussed the description of intermittency in terms of higher
statistical moments in detail. However, this language is still not com­
monly accepted in physics. This motivates our plan to illustrate in this
section how physical insight can be gained from a knowledge of the
behaviour of higher statistical moments, taking a simple hydrodynamic
system as an example. In this intentionally chosen example, properties of
lower (the first and second) moments are of minor importance.
As established by Bobylev's theorem (see, e.g., Deissler, 1984), the
integral properties of the squared vorticity (enstrophy) and of the
squared rate of strain are not independent. However, such identities are
not available for higher powers of vorticity and strain. Such integrals are
useful because they allow one to determine the characteristic of a flow
(either vorticity or deformation) which forms a concentrated structure
and which is distributed over the whole fluid volume. In other words, the
integrals of higher powers of vorticity and deformation characterize the
intermittency of a flow.
This section is aimed at establishing a correspondence between
intermittency and integrals of vorticity and deformation. We emphasize
that such integrals can be written out for any solenoidal vector field. We
adopt a hydrodynamic terminology only in order to make the discussion
more specific and to indicate possible applications. We do not rely on
either equations of motion for a fluid or the Kelvin-Helmholtz theorem
or any other particular property of fluids. Our results are also valid for
the magnetic field (solenoidal axial vector field). In this case the
considered integrals feature the electric current density and the tensor
X/lidHJdXj + dHj/dx,).
We recall that vorticity characterizes the rotation of a given fluid
element. For a solid-body rotating with angular velocity ©, the linear
velocity is u = <o X r and the vorticity is homogeneous, V X u = 2o>.
The vorticity is frozen into the ideal fluid in just the same sense as the

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

210

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

magnetic field. In a two-dimensional case, this means only that the total
(Lagrangian) derivative of vorticity vanishes. In a viscous fluid, the rate
of strain tensor D^ = 1/2 {diij/dXj + duj/dxi) determines the energy
dissipation rate which is given by —1/2 vjDjjD0dZ with v a s the fluid
viscosity (the summation over repeating indices is understood).
Vorticity is a natural characteristic of an incompressible flow. To
decide whether a given vorticity is weak or strong, it would seem natural
to compare the mean squares of vorticity and the rate of strain (their
mean values, or course, vanish for an isotropic random flow). However,
Bodylev's theorem states that these two quantities are equal, i.e., for a
given r.m.s. value of the rate of strain, all incompressible flows are
vortical to the same degree. For a compressible fluid, the integral of the
squared vorticity is always smaller than the integral of the squared rate of
the strain tensor.
Before proceeding to the analysis of higher powers of vorticity and
deformation, we first prove Bobylev's theorem for the case of differential
rotation with (o = (ois1), where s is the distance from the rotation axis
that passes through the origin. This flow is two-dimensional and the
integration is carried out over the plane z = 0. Introducing the notation

n = v x u , s2 = DijDiJ, Al2) = - n 2 - s 2 ,
where summation over repeating subscripts is understood, we have
CO

m

\A dS = In I ~-ds2

= 2TCM2(OO).

0

Thus, the considered integral vanishes when the fluid at infinity (or
boundary) is at rest. In the general case, to prove this identity it is
sufficient to verify that Amcan be written as a divergence of some vector.
Indeed,
=

dty

dun _ dUj dUj

dUj duk

dXk

dxm

dXk dXj

dXk dXk

211

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF INTERMITTENCY

where we have used
e

iU£imn

=

Okm°ln — OknOlm

.

On the other hand,

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

4 \dxk

dxt I \dxk

dXj J

2 \dxk dxk

dxk \

dXj /

dxk Ax,)

Due to incompressibility,

dxkk dXj

which shows that the difference 1/2 Q,2 — S2 is a divergence. For a
compressible fluid, we can easily show that

J>*.--^VA_-J(*)V
Thus, the r.m.s. vorticity is maximal for an incompressible fluid.
Now we can verify that the integrals of higher powers of vorticity and
deformation are not connected by any identities. For the fourth degree,
we have
f ,„> ,
f/1 4,
\ ,
fdu; dut du, duk ,
lA(4)d3r - i l - S4 )d3r = 2 — — —- —-d 3 r.
J
J\4
/
J dXj dXj dxk dx,
This integral does not vanish in the general case. The integral of the
difference of arbitrary 2p-th powers, fAl2p)d3r = (Ai2p)) can also be
written out.
The physical meaning of the quantity (A(2p)) is the following. If this is
positive for large p, then the positions where the velocity changes rapidly
in space are the positions where the vorticity is predominantly concen-

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

212

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

trated; otherwise, these are the places where deformation concentrates.
For instance, for a differential rotation with an angular velocity co = <o0
exp[—(r/r0)2] we have (Aw) = (3/16)tOoro. Therefore, for a system of
individual vortices in an incompressible fluid, (AiA)) and all other
quantities (Al2p)) are always positive. When large fluid volumes have only
a moderate number of vortices formed on their boundaries, then the
places where the velocity strongly changes are the positions of concentra­
tions of the rate of strain. Indeed, on the boundaries of these volumes, the
velocity field can be represented as «, = c^x, with c„ = 0, as required by
incompressibility. At the places where a moving fluid volume moves
apart the fluid or where the fluid closes up behind it, it can be easily
shown that the r.m.s. rate of strain greatly exceeds the r.m.s. vorticity,
provided the matrix ctj is nearly diagonal. At the lateral surfaces of a mov­
ing volume, the flow is close to the Couette flow, u = (ux(y), 0, 0), for
which the squared vorticity and the rate of strain coincide at every
position. Therefore, for flows around produced by bulk motions of large
fluid volumes, (/4 (2,,) )<0.
Theflowsproduced by bulk motions of large fluid volumes through the
surrounding fluid are unstable and degenerate into systems of vortices
(Zeldovich and Kolykhalov, 1982). This means that the first of the
possibilities considered above is more typical of fluid mechanics:
(Al2p)) > 0. Thus, if the initial flow is dominated by the straining motion
((/4(2p)) < 0) it transforms so that (A™) changes sign. In principle, the
signs of the moments (A(2p)) can depend on both p and the Reynolds
number. This occurs when the flow is hierarchical with some members of
the hierarchy being dominated by the vortical motion and the others by
the straining motion.
The considered characteristics of the vorticity distribution can also be
applied to the analysis of turbulent flows. The simplest case is the
homogeneous turbulence in an infinite space (in which all integrals are
normalized to unit volume) which has ergodic properties so that the
averages over space and ensemble coincide.
The behaviour of higher spatial moments of the squared vorticity can
be made use of when deciding whether vorticity is concentrated into
filaments or sheets in a given flow.

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF INTERMITTENCY

213

8.8. VORTEX FILAMENTS IN HYDRODYNAMICS
An extreme expression of the idea of intermittency is a vorticity
concentrated within thin filaments so that its distribution is described by

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

Sl=<t>nS2[r-r0(l,t)],
where r 0 (/, /) is the function that describes the filament shape and
position, / is the length measured along the filament, t is the time, 82 is the
two-dimensional Dirac's delta-function in the planes orthogonal to the
filament at its every point, and n is the unit vector tangent to the line
r = r 0 (/, t). Obviously, both the planes on which S2 is defined and the
vector n change their orientations from point to point and with time.
Isolated vortices are often introduced as a simplification for deriving
the finite-difference analogue of hydrodynamic equations in partial
derivatives. Hydrodynamics of discrete vortices is considered in detail
by Gledzer « a/., (1981).
Agishtein and Migdal (1987) propose to use the discretized arrays of
vortex filaments as a basis for the description of developed turbulence.
We emphasize that only in intermittent situations can individual vortex
filaments be considered as real objects. Unlike the vortices considered by
Gledzer et al., these vortices are real physical objects rather than the
mesh-dependent idealizations of a numerical model.
Following from the solenoidality of vorticity, Vil = 0, the factor^, the
circulation (</> = JQ^S), must be constant along the filament. Moreover,
in a given filament, # is independent of time in an inviscid fluid.
Note that such vortex filaments can arise spontaneously only in threedimensional flows because in two dimensions, the velocity field
v = (vx, vy) of an incompressible fluid is expressed through a single scalar
function and concentration in spots becomes more probable.
The approximation of isolated delta-functional vortex filaments is
adequate for describing the global motion of filaments and fluid but is in­
adequate for describing viscous energy dissipation. Viscosity determines
the true thickness of the filaments.
The idea of turbulent flow that consists of individual vortex filaments

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

214

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

obviously represents a crude approximation to reality. The deviation
from Kolmogorov's laws indicate a fractal character of the system of
vortex filaments (see Chapters 5 and 7). Even an individual filament can
be fractal. But a hierarchical picture of combining smaller vortices into
isolated "intermittent", larger vortices can also have global fractal
properties.
Concentration of a vector field into filaments is also typical of other
physical fields. The next chapter is devoted partially to magnetic ropes in
a moving plasma. These ropes are conceptually similar to the magnetic
tubes of Michael Faraday. In our century, a hundred years after Faraday,
individual vortex filaments are revealed in reality in rotating superfluid
liquid helium. The intensity of every filament, determined by the
quantum condition, is proportional to Planck's constant. It can already
be seen from this fact that this intensity does not depend on time in any
motion of the liquid.
The mutual interaction of ropes formed by a physical vector field
depends on the nature of the field: parallel vortex filaments repel each
other, while neighbouring magnetic ropes do not interact at all because
the magnetic field vanishes outside a rope.
There are some indications that in turbulent flows, vorticity turns out
to be concentrated into tubes (or in one-dimensional filaments in the
approximation described above) rather than the velocity itself (Siggia,
1985; Hussain, 1986). One of the possible explanations of this is based on
the fact that the streamlines are not translationally invariant while the
vortex lines are translationally invariant. However, there is a more
substantial and physical argument. A thin submerged jet of fluid with a
given flux is unstable, while an isolated straight vortex line possesses a
certain elasticity and is stable.
A similar situation occurs in magnetohydrodynamics: what concen­
trates within tubes is the magnetic field (and the current is flowing
azimuthally) rather than the current.
And finally, note one more difference between the behaviours of
hydrodynamic and magnetohydrodynamic vector fields. The hydrodynamic problem is closed and nonlinear. The instantaneous vorticity field
completely determines the velocity field of an incompressible fluid when
vorticity is both a smooth function of position and an array of <S-lines.

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF INTERMITTENCY

215

In a linear hydromagnetic problem, the behaviour of the magnetic field
is considered against the background of independently prescribed
velocity field. The existence of velocity fields with vortex filaments gives
rise to interesting problems as regards the behaviour of the magnetic field
in such flow. Will magnetic ropes arise in this velocity field? Will the
ropes coincide with the vortex lines?

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

8.9. INTERMITTENCY IN NONLINEAR MEDIA
In this section we consider how self-excitation and intermittency are
affected by the nonlinearity which is associated with the back action of
the growingfieldon the medium. We stress that we consider here only the
simplest forms of nonlinearity which cannot lead to formation of
structures by themselves without the presence of randomness. It is
natural to expect that nonlinearity leads mainly to suppression of the
growth of high maxima of the field, thereby smoothing intermittency.
However, the solution of this problem turns out to be less evident and es­
sentially depends on both the temporal dependence of the potential and
the form of the nonlinearity (Zeldovich et ai, 1987).
Here we restrict ourselves to the analysis of the simplest characteristic
of the random intermittent field ^, its limiting (for t — oo) probability
distribution n(\p).
For the sake of simplicity, we put K = 0, i.e., neglect field diffusion.
Those results which are expected to be qualitatively dependent on the
presence of weak diffusion are indicated below.
We consider two types of potentials. The first is the short-correlated (in
time) potential. The second is a steady random potential U = U(x, o).
The potentials are always considered statistically as stationary, homo­
geneous and isotropic.
We begin our discussion with the nonlinearity that does not involve the
potential,

-Z = ty - e/W),

(24)

216

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

where e is a parameter, / is the given nonlinear function, which grows
sufficiently rapidly with ip.
A random process described by equation (24) with the short-correlated
potential,
_ dW.
U(x, t,(o)= U + —~
dt

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

can be considered as one-dimensional diffusion along a line with \p being
the coordinate measured along this line:
dp = xfsdW, + {0} -

ef)dt.

The generating operator of this diffusion has the form

V d2
d
L = ^— + W-ef)—.

(25)

Thus, 1/2\f/2 plays the role of diffusivity while — (U\p — ef) is the
advection velocity field. Denote by p(t, $, f) the fundamental solution of
the evolutionary problem corresponding to the operator (25) such that
p(0, +, *) = S(+ - *) and
^ = U*)P = L' (t)P,
at
where L* denotes the operator adjoint to (25).
Suppose that there exists a limiting stationary density distribution
?r(^) = lim^O, \p, t)- This obeys the equation
(—00

L* n(t) = 0

(26)

with the sole restriction of normalization i^iid^ = 1. Equation (26)
always has solutions. Indeed, the equation

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF INTERMITTENCY

1

d2
2 d\p

d
dip

217

_

2
- — i^2)— x(ty-ef) = 0

has first integral

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

1 d

U*-ef ,

Solutions with c, / 0 have singularity at \p = 0 and are therefore
excluded. We see then that if the function/grows at least as fast as \J/2 then
a limiting distribution exists that is given by

*(*) = - e x p ^ 2 J

^2

d*j

where the constant c follows from the normalization condition.
Consider/= \f/i as an example. Then
(2ef~W2
n( ) =

*

r(2u-

1) ^

2(</

"" ex P(- e ^ 2 )'

(27)

where T denotes Euler's gamma-function. This yields an important
condition 0 > 1/2 for the existence of the density n(\p). For 0 < 1/2, the
density n concentrates at ^ = 0 and the solution decays. For
1/2 < V < 1, the function n{\p) monotonically decreases with \p. In the
limit e -► 0 that corresponds to transition to the linear problem, we have
n -+ 0. In this limiting case, for 0 > 1 the maximal value of the density
decreases as e l/2 . It can be shown that for non-zero diffusivity, K^O, the
density n(\p) and all its derivatives vanish at ^ = 0. In a statistically
homogeneous medium without diffusion, the solution eventually
becomes identically distributed with density n(\p) at all positions with
values of \p being statistically independent at different points. The

218

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

influence of diffusion leads to the appearance of spatial correlations
which decay with distance at a rate that grows with the decrease of K.
Statistical moments of the scalar field are given by

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

2p/2r(2U-

1)

Note that for 0=1 distribution (27) coincides with the truncated
Gaussian distribution since here ^ 2* 0.
The distribution obtained contains maxima of any height, but in the
limit of small diffusivity the situation resembles the Gaussian one: the
maximal field \j/ very rarely shows strong deviation from the most
probable value. These maximal values determine the magnitude of the
mean quantities. Some traces of intermittency can be noticed in the fact
that the probability density nty) only slowly decreases toward small
values of ^. This implies that the spatial distribution of the field ^ is char­
acterized by regions where ^ is anomalously small.
For strong diffusion the field \p decays. More interesting is the case of
intermediate diffusivity which, when combined with nonlinearity, leads
to an unusual distribution of the field: small values of \p are most
probable, but the mean quantities are determined not by these most
probable values but, rather, by the relatively widely by spaced peaks of
the maximal height allowed by nonlinearity. In Chapter 9 we will
consider this intermediate intermittency in more detail.
Consider now a steady random potential, e.g., one with Gaussian
statistical properties, mean value U and r.m.s. deviation a. Obviously,
for / = ^ 3 and in those regions where the potential is positive, the
solution can be steady. Putting d\f//dt = 0 in equation (24), we see that the
solution \p is distributed as (t//e) l/2 . In the regions with U<0, the
solution tends to zero. For a Gaussian potential, the limiting distribution
in the absence of diffusion is given by
1

ef

*(*)-^(*)
+ --7^exp(-^-j,
-6(4) +
^ .

(28)

where we have put ( 7 = 0 for simplicity. This distribution has two
pronounced maxima, at the origin and for ^ = \p, = (<x/2e)1/4. Thus, we

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF INTERMITTENCY

219

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

have an island intermittency: half of the space is occupied by thefielddis­
tributed around the maximum ^. while the remaining half is empty.
When the mean value of the potential differs from zero, 0 ± 0, the ratio
of the volumes of filled and empty regions becomes different and the
problem of percolation properties of those regions arises, similar to that
considered in Chapter 6. Weak diffusion smears the delta-function
maximum of the distribution (28) but this does not affect its intermittent
character.
Consider now the case where nonlinearity enters the potential,
— =
at

g(+)U(x,t,(o)+.

For the simplest case of step-function nonlinearity, g = 1 for \p < \pm and
g = 0 for \p^^/m. Let us first discuss the short-correlated potential. If
0 > 1/2, the solution exponentially grows up to the level \f/m and then re­
mains constant. The case 0 < 1/2 is less simple. At the linear stage, a
typical realization of the field decays exponentially but high moments
grow, i.e., sparse peaks are present. However, every realization is present
at positions where U> 1/2 and *p grows locally. Those maxima of the so­
lution that exceed \pm in the course of this growth remain at this high level
\f/m forever. The resulting stationary picture is the following: at some
widely scattered positions, there are high maxima of the height \pm, while
between them the field decays exponentially. In the considered simple
example, all peaks are identical like randomly scattered telegraph poles
fixed at their positions. In order to diversify this picture, it is sufficient to
consider g(\p) that smoothly decreases at infinity. Consider, e.g.,
g = (1 + \p/\f/my'. For simplicity put 0 = 0. Then

\P(x, t,w)= ■

We can see that at the places where the solution has not reached the level
\pm, it exponentially decreases with time. This exponential decay does not
occur in sparse peaks whose height exceeds ^m owing to the growth of the

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

220

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

linear stage. These peaks can survive for a long time, but the onedimensional Wiener process is recursive and therefore the field at the
peaks eventually decreases down to \f/m, and further. Of course, oscilla­
tions around the level \pm are also possible but their probability is lower
the longer the period of oscillation of the solution. As a result, a typical
realization decays. However, against this fading background stand the
peaks which determine the mean values, i.e., the intermittency persists.
Indeed, even though a typical realization decays, the mean value (^) is
independent of time. Consider the situation where at a certain moment tm
the solution intersects the level ^ m , say it becomes equal to 2^ m . Since W,
is a random process with independent increments, we can consider the
level \f/ = 2\pm as the starting point. Then the probability P that up to the
moment t the trajectory will experience one more improbable event and
fall down to \p = 1 \pm decreases with time, similar to the probability of
remiss in can tossing (see Chapter 2), and is proportional to (t — tm)~ul
Since a typical realization of Wt is also of the order tU2, the average value
given by (ip) = P(y}/)^ = P^m W,-,m is constant in time. This fact is true
for any dependence of g on \p, following from the vanishing of the mean
value of Ito's integral Sg{ip)i(W,)dW, (McKean, 1969).
Higher statistical moments grow as {V) °c t~mt''2 oc W, oc t(p~m. It
can be expected that this weak power-law growth of the moments is
stabilized by weak diffusion. Thus, for K^O the peaks that arise are
distributed over their heights with the Gaussian-type distribution.
However, the field distribution in general is far from being Gaussian.
Between the widely spaced peaks (whose height is inversely proportional
to K raised to a certain power), the field is weak and they are determined
by their diffusion from the peaks. Meanwhile, in a field with Gaussian
distribution, a typical realization behaves like the mean value, with
deviations of the order of the r.m.s. value. Of course, for sufficiently large
K the diffusion smears the peaks and intermittency disappears.
In the case of a steady potential and step-function form for g(<p),
considering again the regions with positive and negative potentials
separately, we obtain the following limiting distribution of the type (28):
7i(+) = p6(4,) +

(l-P)S(+-4,m),

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF INTERMITTENCY

221

where P is the probability of the potential having negative values. For
more complicated forms of g(\f/) the limiting distribution exists only
when diffusivity is non-vanishing. This limiting distribution also pos­
sesses two maxima which already are not delta-functions while the
quantity similar to ^m is now determined by K.
Thus, for a steady potential, the island-type intermittency occurs
independently of the character of the local nonlinear interaction.
The intermittency is even more pronounced when the nonlinearity is
non-local, for instance when the nonlinear function in (24) depends on
(if/) or (\pp) rather than on ^. It is clear that in this case {ip*0) becomes inde­
pendent of time, instead of (^). All moments of orders p < p0 with some
p0 dependent on the form of the nonlinearity and a typical realization of
the field decay exponentially, while moments with p> p0 continue their
intermittent growth typical of the linear problem.
Consequently, the character of the nonlinear solution essentially
depends on the temporal behaviour of the potential and on the form of
the nonlinearity. In applications, additional restrictions of conservation
of a certain moment is often imposed, e.g., the mean value in the problem
of bacteria regeneration with restricted food supply (Zeldovich, 1983) or
the mean square (the energy) in the problem of radio wave propagation in
a random medium (Rytov et ai, 1978). Nonlinearity can be of a more
complicated nature, e.g., combining deterministic nonlinear damping
and nonlinear modification of the random potential. In this case, the
properties of the nonlinear solution are determined by the competition of
the two nonlinear effects with one smearing out intermittency and the
other enhancing it. Detailed quantitative analysis of this competition is a
subject of further research.
8.10. PROPAGATION OF FIELD FRONTS IN RANDOM MEDIA
As a rule, the discussions above presumed that initially, the field is
distributed over the whole space, ip0(x). This could either be a uniform
distribution ^0(x) = const, or a spatially uniform random field. When the
initial field ^ 0 ( x ) is concentrated within a finite volume, at later stages it
can not only grow at a given point but also propagate due to diffusion.

222

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

It is well known that a passive admixture diffusively propagates
according to the law x oc (K/) I / 2 , i.e., the propagation velocity decreases
with time as v oc t~l/2. When diffusion is combined with local generation,
the propagation velocity becomes constant in time. This process of
propagation of the admixture front in an unstable medium is the subject
of the theory of Kolmogorov, Petrovsky and Piskunov (1937); these ideas
are widely applied in the combustion theory (see Zeldovich et ai, 1985).
Let us illustrate this problem by the following simple example of
deterministic potential. Consider the equation
— = U0\p + KA\(/, U0 = const.,
dt
with the initial distribution concentrated at the origin. The solution is
evidently given by

The argument of the exponential function can be recast as
r2

1

U0t ~ — = ~ — (r - lyfu^i) (r +

2yfW),

from which it follows that the surface \f/ = const, propagates with a
velocity
t; = 2y/icU0.

In a random medium, a typical realization propagates with the velocity

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF INTERMITTENCY

223

Simultaneously, the mean values also propagate so that the p-th
moment's propagation velocity is given by
vp = 2 ^ / v c ,
where y„ is its growth rate. In a short-correlated medium, in the limit of
weak diffusion we have
- , (p - 1)(72T
The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

VP=V

+

.

Consequently,
V < V, < V2 <

This means that the boundary of the distribution of ^ is very indented
and fractal. The propagation occurs by the protrusion of the leader
tongues.
When analyzing the propagation of the field \p, it is convenient to
interpret ^ as the bacteria number density, the potential U as the rate of
their reproduction or death, and the diffusivity K as the rate of their
spreading in space. The field \p can be visualized as a map of the
propagation of an epidemic disease caused by the bacteria. Then the
fractal properties of the distribution boundary suggests not only a slow
propagation of the infection from one neighbour to another but also that
improbable but catastrophic intrusions of the infection into unaffected
regions are important in spreading an epidemic.
At first sight, it would seem that nonlinearity is of minor importance
for the propagation of the field \p, because near the front the values of \f/
are usually small and the nonlinearity seems to be negligible. However,
the very possibility of propagation of the statistical moments at velocities
exceeding that of a typical realization is associated with the existence of
peaks whose occurrence has low probability but the height is large; with
these peaks nonlinearity is essential. As a result, in nonlinear problems all
mean quantities propagate at the same velocity but the propagation front

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

224

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

has a finite thickness. In the case of strong diffusion this fractal zone con­
sists mainly of sparse peaks. Returning to the analogy of an epidemic
disease, we notice that this is the way in which epidemics spread in our
mobile age. Adequate sanitary and medical measures (the nonlinearity)
result in a relatively low number of seriously affected persons. In
contrast, for relatively low mobility, high reproduction rate and weak
nonlinearity, the propagation front consists mainly of phases with high
values of \p and only rare holes. This picture seems to be adequate for
describing catastrophic epidemics of the Middle Ages when only the
strongest persons survived them. Of course, such comparisons are
reasonable only for similar deseases which were fought with similar
efforts by physicians: influenza and plague spread differently.
We would like to illustrate the process of propagation of an epidemic in
a random medium using the communication of such a thoughtful
observer as Gregory, Bishop Turonesis, the author of "Historiarum libri
X" (6th century AD). Describing the plague epidemic of the year 588, he
noted (Gregorii, Hist., IX, 22) that the infection was conveyed by a ship
which came to Marseille from Spain. Since the inhabitants of the town
bought goods from the ship, very soon one of the houses with eight
inhabitants had perished. However, the epidemic did not spread imme­
diately after this. Only after some time were all parts of the town infected.
Meanwhile, the bishop and the remaining people escaped to St. Victor
Basilica. The disaster ended after only two months, but when people
came back to their homes the epidemic flared up again. The author noted
that such reccurrences of the plague repeated many times before the final
end of the epidemic. From the viewpoint of theory, the role of the ship
corresponds to a "quasioptimal" trajectory along which the solution
propagates (see equation (8)). The first event of the infection corresponds
to the predecessors in the form of leading tongues followed by a universal
infection and the formation of a local minimum (people escaped to the
basilica). The following events are essentially nonlinear and they go
beyond the scope of the present theory. The end of epidemics due to
"shortage of fuel" and the relapses that followed are considered, e.g., by
Polak and Mikhailov (1983). Notice that Gregory compares the spread of
the epidemic with the spreading of fires. Although commentators note
that this comparison is inspired by "Aeneis" of P. Virgilius Maro (II,
304), this image agrees perfectly well with modern physical views.

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF INTERMITTENCY

225

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

8.11. THE INTERMITTENT WORLD
To conclude this chapter, we would like to discuss the role of intermittency in phenomena which are relatively far from the interests of a
physicist. In contrast to the problem of intermittency of magnetic fields
in a moving conducting medium (see Chapter 9) where the analysis is
based on for laws of physics and is essentially quantitative, for the case
considered here only a qualitative description is as yet possible.
However, the examples of this section will make clear that intermittency
is a very widespread phenomenon which is far from restricted to
magnetohydrodynamics in particular or physics in general. (At any rate,
the importance and beauty of a theory are not directly connected with the
range of its applicability.) In every day life as well as in the Arts, we con­
stantly encounter situations which hardly resemble the artificially
regularized conditions that are so typical of a physical theory and in
which the role of chance is intentionally smoothed out.
We can come across intermittency every day indeed. Imagine, if you
can, that you are walking around in the renowned Murom woods, the
birthplace of the characters of Russian folklore. It is early summer and
the mushrooms have just appeared. An inexperienced mushroom collec­
tor returns home with an empty basket after having combed the woods.
His confusion is even stronger because he is sure that somewhere in the
woods there must be a narrow strip studded with mushrooms. This is a
typical manifestation of intermittency at a linear stage of an instability.
Of course, this phenomenon can be considered from another standpoint.
The strip rich with mushrooms surely has a special type of vegetation,
temperature and illumination which altogether explain an abundance of
early mushrooms. An exact determination of all such conditions would
allow one, in principle, to find other places which can make any
mushroom fanatic happy. This is a more common formulation of the
problem. Nevertheless, the multitude of equally important factors and
their random character result in an intermittent character of the
distribution of mushroom-rich places in a forest and their productivity.
Thus, at least equally valuable is another formulation of the problem,
which considers the abundance of mushroom as a random field.
During the early-mushroom season, their distribution is very uneven.
After a few weeks mushrooms can be found in almost every part of a

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

226

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

forest. Even though the gradients of mushroom productivity become less
pronounced, your good friend would always show you a special place
where mushrooms remain exceptionally numerous even at this "non­
linear" stage. Similar notions are characteristic of many other realms of
our life: artists rely on inspiration, gamblers wait for the rare lucky
coincidences, sailors are terrified by "the ninth wave".
In contrast to the woods, intermittency at a farmer's fields is smoothed
out by the cultivation of the land, care of the crops, etc. Here
intermittency can be noticed on another level and this can be revealed
when one compares the effectiveness of different farms and considers
some statistical information. This intermittency is typical of many
human activities. In a jocular form, this is expressed by the observation
that "80 percent of beer is consumed by 20 percent of the population". It
is difficult to judge how stable this ratio 20:80 is but this observation is
undoubtedly well founded. The uneven distribution of welfare provides
another example. These effects can be illustrated by observations of
student groups formed on some competitive basis. Even when competi­
tion is strong and the teacher expects to have a uniformly strong class,
very soon two small groups composed of very strong and very weak
students separate from the moderate majority. These two groups
essentially determine the progress of the whole class. The initial level of
the applicants determines the average level of the class but this structure
with a few leading and a few backward students is very stable. Only
special measures like a reduction in requirements to the applicants or
collection of backward students in special classes can suppress such a
structure. As shown by our experience, such attempts lead to catastrophic
consequences for the students.
When thinking over the results concerning intermittency, one cannot
help switching one's thoughts to social analogies. We have interpreted the
equation dip/dt = U\f> + KA$ used for our study of intermittency above as
a model of the evolution of bacterial population in a medium with
randomly distributed food supply and other living factors when the
population is able to spread diffusionally in space. This model predicts
that the bacteria gather in comparatively stable clusters at places where
the environment is most favourable for their development. This result
can be verified by means of special microbiological investigations. But,
evidently, this picture is surprisingly a good description of the distribu-

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF INTERMITTENCY

227

tion of human population. There are many levels of concentration of
people, from villages to towns, cities and such monstrous cities as Tokyo,
New York or Moscow. If we exclude such unique cases as Singapore,
where this book is published, cities occupy a comparatively small
territory while the population density within them is incomparable with
those outside these structures. To be specific, consider two examples. In
Russia (it is essential here that this geographical unit does not coincide
with the USSR) population living outside the small or large settlements is
practically absent. This kind of population is typical of another part of
the USSR, Lithuania, where "Viehkiemiai" or small isolated farmer
settlements are rather numerous. However, even in Lithuania, several
million people live within a 105 km2 area, while in Vilnius, the capital of
Lithuania, the population of 0.5 million lives within a circle of 10 km
diameter. Tens of smaller towns in Lithuania occupy a negligible part of
the territory but they give shelter to the majority of the population. The
completely unoccupied territories (woods, swamps, etc.) are not very
vast; their area compares with that of the farmer settlements. Thus, we
show evidence of two types of intermittency: in Russia the population
density is negligibly small in a typical realization and almost the total
population is concentrated in an intermittent structure while in Lith­
uania the intermittency peaks stand against a background of a typical
realization significantly differing from zero. Different kinds of intermit­
tency are present within the cities as well. For buildings, in Vilnius
typical large districts have private houses (the typical realization) while
in Moscow people live mainly in large apartment blocks (intermittent
structure). Moreover, lower levels of intermittency (districts uniformly
and densely covered with buildings) are permanently supplanted by
higher levels (isolated huge apartment blocks). This growth tendency of
higher elements of an intermittent hierarchy is typical of Russia where
the inhabitants of rural areas strive to move to cities and from smaller
cities to larger ones. Within cities, there is a tendency of replacing the
traditional uniform buildings of mixed apartment houses, offices, culture
and amusement centers with a non-uniform distribution where the
inhabitants live in one district, have jobs in another and amuse
themselves in a third. This tendency of declining the diverse types of
housing in favour of the highest level of the intermittent hierarchy is one
of the major social problems of this country.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

228

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

Surprisingly enough, this phenomenon even allows us to trace the
differences of Ito's and Stratonovich's approaches to the evolutionary
equations. When unreasonable and unpredictable political novelties
occur so frequently that people cannot get adapted to them (Stratonovich-type regime is replaced by the Ito-type), this results in degeneracy of
the intermittent hierarchy (the population moves to cities from the rural
areas).
Another urgent social problem is bureaucracy. Here, one is tempted
again to cite analogies with the simple results of the intermittency theory.
We already know that random media are most suitable for the develop­
ment of intermittency. Having compared the hierarchical elements of
this structure with bureaucratic clans, we can understand why the
stagnation periods in social development are marked by the catastrophic
growth of bureaucratic mafia groups even if initially the society was
dominated by honest people. The frequent shaking up of the bureaucratic
system can slow down this growth and even suppress the formation of
small and weak groups. But they can do nothing against the inevitable
development of the most influential groups of bureaucrats. The only way
to supress their growth consists in removing the mechanism of instability
by introducing some social antibureaucratic mechanisms.
Of course, similar analogies are not restricted to sociology. Let us
mention an example from evolutionary biology. We can consider the
coordinate x in our simplest equation as the coordinate in the "space of
properties" of organisms and the potential as a measure of the ability of
an organism to survive and reproduce which depends on its particular
properties. Then the formation of the structures can be interpreted as the
formation of the species at the early stages of evolution. At subsequent
stages, the species are fixed by various biological barriers that prevent the
exchange of genetic information between different species (an analogy of
nonlinear diffusion that promotes the development of the structures).
The dimension of such space is unclear but the qualitative properties of
intermittency are practically independent of the dimension.
The imagination can suggest more examples of this kind. We think that
this implies that the concept of intermittency reflects something essential
in the laws of nature and society. However, one should not be so
excessively enthusiastic as to drag all the known structures up to the
simplest results concerning intermittency which were discussed in this

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF INTERMITTENCY

229

book. The systems considered in this section are much more complicated
than a bacterial population in an inhomogeneous medium. Even if in
some aspects our life hardly differs from the evolution of bacterial
associations, in other aspects they are obviously different. In particular,
the progressive growth of cities is undoubtedly connected with the more
or less deliberate settling of people at places where life is more attractive.
The effect of free will is, of course, neglected by our simplistic equation.
The birthrate of the population of the largest cities cannot account for the
total birthrate, and the growth time of cities is not directly connected
with the activity period of a given generation. The similarity in
manifesting different kinds of intermittency is associated with a weak
dependence of the basic features of intermittency on a specific form of
evolutionary equation. This does not suggest that the simplest equation
of the bacterial evolution can be applied to sociology.
This universality of intermittency leads to an important mathematical
problem, that of distinguishing and describing the classes of evolutionary
operators with random coefficients which lead to intermittent phenom­
ena. When properties of intermittent structures cease to be universal,
general considerations are of little help. Let us turn to an example where
this feature is essential.
The conglomerations of bacteria considered above have an approxim­
ately circular shape. Due to the solenoidality of the field, filaments arise
in the vectorial problems of magnetohydrodynamics. A naive extension
of these results suggests that people should gather in isotropic (circular)
conglomerates. Indeed, cities normally have a roughly circular shape
when there is no external restrictions such as those imposed by rivers or
sea shores (anisotropy of environment). Of course, some cities can be
extended for hundreds of kilometers along the sea shores or river banks
(Sochi or Volgograd in the USSR) but the idea of a megapolis between
Moscow and Leningrad (of length about 650 km) as proposed by the
academician Dmitry Likhachev is generally considered a polemic exag­
geration. This shape is typical of settlements extended along a road. A
careful analysis of the evolutionary equation of bacterial evolution also
reveals such extended structures at lower levels of intermittent hierarchy.
Linear structures can also arise in more delicate processes of the
evolution of mankind. Thus, L.N. Gumilev has proposed a theory of the
origin of ethnic communities which suggests that formation of ethnic

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

230

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

groups occurs because of the concentration of a specific property, which
Gumilev calls the passionarity, which, possibly, has a genetic nature.6
Outbursts of ethnogenesis, which result in the formation of ethnic
communities, are not randomly scattered in space and time. They occur
simultaneously within narrow extended regions extending to distances
comparable to the Earth's radius. Gumilev is inclined to propose an
extraterrestrial origin of ethnogenetic outbursts. This conclusion seems
to be premature; more likely, we find evidence of a linear, filamentary in­
termittent structure similar to that of the magnetic field.
A typical property of intermittent distributions is the violation of the
ergodic properties: different types of averages cease to be coincident. In
real life this violation is much more common than in the refined world of
theoretical physics. Two examples of this violation come to mind. The
genetic studies of the evolutionary process are based on space averages
while predictions based on Mendel's law concern ensemble averages. For
sufficiently large populations, these averages coincide (the HardyWeinberg law). However, in many isolated communities (e.g., in moun­
tain valleys) plant populations are relatively small and their evolution
deviates considerably from predictions of the Hardy-Weinberg law (see,
e.g., Ville, 1967, (6359)). Another example (Luchinsky, 1984) considers
economics. The average velocity of a vehicle is defined as the ratio of the
distance travelled to the travel time,

s J>>*
T

T

This velocity can naturally be considered as the time-average. However,
one can consider the instantaneous velocity as a function of the
coordinate measured along a trajectory, rather than a function of time,
e

Ideas of Lev Gumilev (son of the famous poetess Anna Akhmatova and poet Nicolay
Gumilev) are so radical that in the seventies his basic work Ethnogenesis and the
Biosphere of the Earth could only be deposited as a manuscript (even though his shorter
papers on this subject have been published). The publication of this monograph has now
been announced.

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF INTERMITTENCY

231

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

which leads to the definition of spatially averaged velocity:

It can be easily seen that when a vehicle moves with varying speed, (v)
always exceeds U. Notably, at Soviet motor transport depots the required
amount of gasoline is determined based on one type of averaged velocity
while the accounts of economic results are based on the other type. One
can easily guess what happens with the resulting difference between the
obtained and consumed amounts of gasoline.
Having mentioned the social applications of the theory of random
processes, we cannot bypass the major catastrophes which recently
stunned the world. One of them is the Challenger tragedy, the other is the
Chernobyl accident. Here we discuss the Chernobyl catastrophe on
which the authors are better informed. Another unfortunate event is the
unexpected loss of control of the Phobos-1 space probe.
The idea of intermittency has induced a shift in our views on the role of
exceptionally large fluctuations as introduced in physics by L. Boltzmann. Physics of the 20th century was rather sceptical about the
importance of such rare events. However, modern scholars in other fields
often admit very improbable events whose impact is very considerable
and determines long-term evolution of the considered system. So, the
historical development of some states, e.g., the Roman Empire, is
sometimes regarded as an empire branched out from the general course
of progress (see Stuerman and Trofimova, 1971). The geologists mention
a new uniformism reviving the ideas of Cuvier. They consider that rare
random events, like collision of the Earth with a large asteroid, have
determined some crucial epochs in the evolution of life on the Earth (see
Berggren and van Couvering, 1984). Gradually, one more possible
catastrophe of this type, the nuclear holocaust, has become a subject of
intense and considerable scientific discussion. Evidently, common
concepts of probability based on everyday experience are of little help in
such cases; human civilization can die in a nuclear war only once.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

232

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

The expansion of the ideas of modern catastrophism causes a natural
negative reaction of the scientific community, which is not used to such
approaches. We often hear the question whether the implementation of
the idea of a catastrophe into scientific usage means a rejection of
scientific ways of cognition. It is an attempt to legalize the belief in
miracles in science decorated by scientific phraseology. We believe that
these ideas are principally different from such vulgar ideas as the
explanation of Walking on the Sea by occasional directed coherent
motion of the molecules which constitute the body. Indeed, there is an
exceedingly small probability that in the course of their chaotic quasioscillatory motion, the molecules move altogether in one direction. We
would not estimate this probability here; probably, it is much lower than
all other small probabilities discussed in this book. We only note that
even this improbable event can hardly lead to an expected result. Instead
of walking, a heart attack due to a disturbed blood circulation is a more
plausible result.
Improbable catastrophes which we discuss here admit two ways of
interpretation: probabilistic and deterministic. The latter is more com­
mon and customary. When the chain of events that have led to a
catastrophe is considered in detail, the disaster becomes a natural and
unique consequence. To be specific, we briefly consider two recent
improbable events of this kind, the Chernobyl accident and the loss of the
Phobos-1 space probe. The reader can easily adapt our discussion to
examples of which he (or she) is better informed, e.g., the Challenger
accident.
The Chernobyl accident was an explosion which led to ejection of
radioactive materials and contamination of vast areas, evacuation of
about 100,000 inhabitants of the 30-km zone around the nuclear energy
plant, health damage for thousands and mental shock for many more
people living close to and far from Chernobyl - small town by Pripyat
river, a tributary of Dnieper.
The immediate cause of the accident was an experiment planned
beforehand during a scheduled shutdown of the reactor. In accordance
with the plan of the experiment, one of the emergency control systems of
the reactor was shut off although this violated the regulations governing
maintenance of the reactor. However, this violation was necessary in
order to carry out the planned experiment and was not dangerous by

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF INTERMITTENCY

233

itself. Owing to a mistake made by an operator, the scheduled starting
moment of the experiment was missed and the output power of the
reactor had fallen too much. Even though the operator managed to turn
on the output energy, one more emergency control system was switched
off in order to avoid a complete shutdown of the reactor and to carry out
the experiment. The computer of the control system then indicated that
the reactor should be shut down immediately but, notwithstanding this,
the operator had started the experiment. In fact, the conditions were far
from those planned for this experiment. After a few seconds, the output
power strongly increased and the heat transfer system became ineffec­
tive. An attempt to activate all available emergency control systems
failed and the reactor was destroyed (see Information, 1986 for details).
Thus, the operator was determined to carry out the planned experi­
ment under any circumstances. This motivated him to neglect all the
regulations concerning normal handling of the reactor and led to the loss
of the sense of danger. Paradoxically enough, such behaviour is known
and understandable for a true experimentalist working hard in his
laboratory. However, the Chernobyl reactor was not a scientific labora­
tory but only an industrial energy device which could not bear abnormal
conditions. Probably, this contradiction between the limited possibilities
of machinery and the freedom of a scientific experiment is a fundamental
cause of the accident. In this sense, the accident is only a logical result of
all the proceeding events and the role of chance reduces to that of an
infernal driving belt.
However, all explanations of the particular causes of the Chernobyl
accident do not explain that deep and strong reaction of the people
worldwide which allows one to call this accident a catastrophe. This
social aspect has been elucidated by the German philosopher Friedrich
Schelling more than 150 years ago (see Schelling, 197,2). As Schelling
believed, the idea of permanent progress is essentially the idea of aimless
progress and, therefore, infinite progress is a meaningless and sad
concept. In accordance with this prophetic thought, the negative conse­
quences of modern development of science and technology have brought
mankind to the edge of disaster. The ghosts of nuclear holocaust and the
ruined environment surround us. It is the responsibility of scientists to
develop a new strategy of living which would rely on safe and ecologically
pure solutions of current problems, thus diminishing the probability of

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

234

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

such catastrophes. Nobody can suppress completely the role of random­
ness. We can only attempt to diminish the power of the chance.
Let us recall the other accident. In July 1988 two space probes, Phobos1 and Phobos-2, were launched for Mars. The goal of the mission was to
explore Mars and its satellite, Phobos. The space probe Phobos is a
complicated autonomous system controlled by signals transmitted from
the Earth. With an interval of approximately two days, a series of
commands was transmitted to the probe, which were handled by onboard
computers and executed by service systems and scientific instruments.
The results of scientific measurements were transmitted back to Earth.
In early September an unexpected accident occured in the Phobos-1
spacecraft. Owing to a mistake, one character was omitted in one of the
instructions transmitted to Phobos-1. Due to the occasional coincidence,
the distorted command, which was originally devised for some scientific
instrument, had caused the switching off of the orientation system of the
solar-cell panels. As a result, the probe turned away from the Sun, the
power supply went off and the probe ceased to obey commands from
Earth. After a short period, an autonomous emergency storage battery
had also discharged. For forty days, the personnel were unsuccessfully
trying to re-activate the probe by uninterupted transmission of powerful
radio signals. Phobos-1, which cost about 300 million dollars, was lost,
together with the expected important scientific results. The fatal role was
played by chance. Probably, the accident would not have occured if the
commands were secure against distortion, texts of the commands were
less similar, etc. However, nobody is safe from all possible sources of
accidents, e.g., collision with a meteorite or accidents at the launch site.
Space exploration will always remain a risky enterprise.
Both these accidents are (or will be) carefully analyzed by specialists.
This will, in certain sense, reduce the probability of similar accidents.
However, this approach, based on a traditional treatment of rare events,
does not take an important peculiarity of improbable accidents into
account: often they are not simply improbable and it is quite possible that
a catastrophe of a given type would occur only once in the history of
mankind. However, this does not imply that other catastrophes caused by
effects still not envisaged by Man are impossible. Probably, this suggests
that when planning a complicated modern technical system, the SDI
complex or a chemical plant, we should be aware of the possibility of a

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF INTERMITTENCY

235

catastrophic accident however reliable the safety measures seem to be. Of
course, this does not imply that the safety measures are ineffective or that
we should abandon the construction of the gigantic plants; the solution
should be consciously motivated rather than dictated by illusions. As
Epiktetos put it, we should take chances with bold confidence or
otherwise stop the development. Both of these alternatives can be met in
the history of mankind. The Titanic catastrophe has taught us that even
the most reliable safety measures cannot ensure absolute safety of the
vessels. Nevertheless, we supply every ship with life jackets and lifeboats
in amounts sufficient for all the passengers and crew members and
continue the navigation being conscious that these measures still cannot
eliminate the risk but only decrease it. As an example of an alternative so­
lution, we recall that in 1878, a leftist terrorist Vera Zasulich made an at­
tempt on the life of the Petersburg city governor general Fyodor Trepoff.
She was arrested and brough to a trial by jury. Her guilt was obvious but
Zasulich was discharged by the jury whose members appreciated her
motivation for the murder attempt. In those times this occasion was
considered as a triumph of justice and until now remains an important
argument in favour of court of jury. Meanwhile, the spread of the
political air of terrorism in the 1970's has resulted in reconsideration of
that early perception of terrorism: now we are inclined to condemn any
terrorist act irrespective of its motivation.
The Chernobyl tragedy has induced a flood of papers, articles and
books which discuss the details of the accident, guilt of the persons
involved, their faults, etc. The technocrats and the antipollution activists
argue about very specific problems. However, it seems that what is most
important now is to develop a new thinking relevant to our nuclear age.
From the standpoint of the concepts developed in this chapter, mininizing the consequences of such accidents requires an activation of
nonlinear effects that would suppress intermittency. However, we would
like to stress that the scale of this problem is so enormous that it can be
solved only through combined efforts of politicians, artists, technocrats,
and everybody else (see, e.g., Wolf, 1987).

CHAPTER

NINE

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

MAGNETIC FIELD IN A FLOW OF
CONDUCTIVE FLUID

The previous chapter was devoted to the phenomenon of intermittency,
i.e., to the development of intermittent structures in an initially smooth
distribution. Intermittency is a very universal phenomenon which occurs
practically irrespective of detailed properties of the background instab­
ility in a random medium provided only that the random field is of multi­
plicative type, because the basis of its development is provided by the
central limit theorem. However, for a long period intermittency was
neglected. The reason is associated, probably, with the fact that physics
usually analyzes phenomena using simple and exactly solvable models.
Such a model for studies of many instabilities is a deterministic medium
with, e.g., spatially uniform parameters where intermittency cannot
develop. In contrast to this general situation, the dynamo-generation of
magnetic fields in a conducting medium cannot occur in simple and
symmetric velocity fields. For this reason, almost from the very
beginning of its development, the dynamo theory considers the random
velocity field where intermittency is inevitable.
9.1. THE KINEMATIC DYNAMO PROBLEM
Since time immemorial, magnetism was a subject of great curiosity. In
the Ancient World, the problem of explaining this phenomenon has got
the reputation of being intractable. For instance, when discussing the
problem of prediction and the study of random phenomena, Cicero
mentioned in "De divinatione" the following example of an enigmatic
but undoubtedly real phenomenon: "There exists a stone called magnet
which attracts iron, but the cause of this I cannot explain; would you then
237

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

238

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

deny the very fact?" (De div., 1,86). The explanation of this phenomenon
of ferromagnetism is correctly considered as one of highest achievements
of solid state physics. Ferromagnetism (as well as superconductivity) is
an essentially quantum phenomenon and, therefore, exists only at low
temperatures below the so-called Curie point. It is a fortunate coinci­
dence that these low temperatures are sufficiently high from the human
viewpoint (the Curie point of iron is about 1000 K). If high temperature
superconductivity is a sensation of our days, high temperature ferromag­
netism can be considered as a sensation of the era of Thales of Milet.
Magnetism also has another modus Vivendi as a component of an
electromagnetic wave. This form of magnetism, which is so familiar in
broadcasting, is essentially relativistic.
Magnetic fields also arise around wires that carry the electric currents.
This last type of source of magnetic fields is frequently found in nature.
Consider the Earth's magnetic field. We can be sure that the deep interior
of the Earth does not hide a ferromagnetic crystal because the tempera­
ture there exceeds the Curie point. It is more realistic to envisage a ring
current within the Earth, which produces the geomagnetic field. Magne­
ticfieldsexist also in many planets, the Sun, stars, galaxies and, probably,
even in larger objects such as clusters of galaxies. In cosmic environ­
ments, quasi-stationary magnetic fields are one of the typical compon­
ents. The range of the field strengths is very wide and, based on everyday
experiences, in many cases one would call them weak. However, these
magnetic fields are often in the state of what is called energy equipartition when the magnetic energy is comparable with the kinetic energy of
small-scale motions. Therefore, the magnetic fields equally determine the
dynamics of the cosmic matter.
In 1919, in his remarkable report to the British Association for
Advancement of Science, J. Larmor formulated the problem of the
explanation of cosmic magnetism. He correctly identified the source of
the magnetic fields of the Earth and the Sun. Magnetic fields can be
produced by the hydrodynamic motions of electrically neutral conduct­
ing mediums. As has been described by Faraday's induction law, the time
variation of the magnetic field is determined by the curl of the electric
field:

dt

MAGNETIC FIELD IN CONDUCTIVE FLUID

239

As described by Ohm's law, in the reference system moving along with
the medium, the electric current is proportional to the electric field. In
the rest frame, the electricfieldhas a corresponding magnetic field so that
for the moving medium

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

E =

CT"lj-c"'vX

H,

where a is the electric conductivity and v is the velocity of the medium.
The velocity v is here assumed to be much smaller than the speed of light.
Therefore, the displacement currents can be neglected and Oersted's law
yields

i=fvxH.
An
Elimination of j and H from these three equations yields the following
equation which describes the generation of magnetic fields:
— = VX(vXH)-VX(vmVXH),
at

(1)

where vm = c2/(4na) is the magnetic diffusivity. This equation was first
obtained by H. Hertz and it is known as the induction equation.
When considering the problem of the origin of magnetic fields, it is
natural to assume that at the initial stages, magnetic fields are weak and
do not affect the motions of the medium. Thus, the formulated problem
in which the velocity field is prescribed is called the kinematic dynamo
problem.
The maintenance of magnetic fields by electric currents flowing at
infinity should be excluded. To do this, it is sufficient to require a
sufficiently rapid decrease of the initial magnetic field H 0 as r-* oo.
The kinematic dynamo problem is linear in magnetic field strength.
When we are interested in the self-excitation of the field (i.e., exponential
time-growth), it is natural to compare the two terms on the right-hand
side of equation (1). The second term describes magnetic dissipation
while the first one can lead to field growth. For a crude estimation, we

240

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

replace the derivatives by the corresponding ratios to obtain
dH vH
H
~ T - v m - ,

(2)

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

where / is the characteristic scale of the velocity field. Thus, we see that
field intensification prevails over dissipation when the magnetic Reyn­
olds number

K--

vl
vm

is large. In cosmic plasmas, this condition is usually fulfilled; even though
the cosmic plasma is not a very good conductor and plasma velocities are
moderate, the involved distances are so large that the magnetic Reynolds
number is usually very large, e.g., 108 in the Solar photosphere.
Consequently, it can be expected that under such conditions the
magnetic fields grow exponentially: H oc exp(y/) at the rate
v
y~-r

(3)

which does not depend on the magnetic diffusivity for large magnetic
Reynolds numbers. Such process of magnetic field growth is called fast
dynamo. It would seem that only one more step is required to solve the
problem: having considered some very simple flow, e.g., v(r, 0 = const.,
one should evaluate the numerical factor in (3) and the spatial distribu­
tion of the generated field. If it is successful, this solution would be a good
basis for dealing with the more complicated velocity fields.
However, such a naive attempt cannot be successful. The simplest
velocity field, parallel transformation, does not affect the magnetic field
at all due to the Galilean invariance. Even more complicated, but still
tractable, flows confined to planes or spherical surfaces are also a miss.
Although for such flows, equation (1) cannot always be exactly solved, it
can be shown that flows with a high degree of symmetry cannot generate
magnetic fields (see, e.g., Moffatt, 1978).

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

MAGNETIC FIELD IN CONDUCTIVE FLUID

241

Nevertheless, there exist steady velocity fields in which the embedded
magneticfieldgrows exponentially. The simplest one is the helicalflowof
a conducting fluid in which the fluid both rotates around a certain axis
and moves along it. This example can ensure that magnetic field can
indeed be generated by a moving conducting fluid but the field growth
rate of this dynamo cannot be estimated by (2) with the dissipation
neglected. The reason for this is the fact that in this case the dissipation
term does not only oppose field generation but also couples the different
components of the magnetic field, which is necessary for its growth.
Thus, magnetic diffusion controls the field growth, and for large Rm the
growth rate turns out to be proportional to a certain negative power of the
magnetic Reynolds number,
y~y/C,

<?>0.

(4)

Such dynamos are said to be slow.
The physical nature of slow dynamos can be understood with the help
of a procedure proposed by Alfven (1950) (see Fig. 9.1). A magnetic loop

Fig. 9.1. Mechanism of amplification of magnetic field as proposed by Alfven. Splitting of
the magnetic loop into two parts (the transition from (b) to (c)) occurs owing to magnetic
diffusion.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

242

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

is first stretched to twice its size. Then the segments with opposite
directed fields are brought closer. Then the magnetic diffusion leads to
separation of the loop into two loops whose sizes are equal to the initial
loop size. Finally, these two loops are superimposed. As a result, the
magnetic flux through the loop cross-section is doubled. Here we clearly
see the role of magnetic diffusion: for Rm -* oo the field ceases to grow.
It cannot be excluded that such mechanisms of generation are of
importance in some objects (e.g., jets ejected by radiogalaxies). But in the
Sun, the magnetic fields vary at the time scale (3); this plausibly indicates
that the fast dynamo is operative. Illustrative examples of the fast
dynamo are considerably more complicated than Alfven's procedure.
This can be seen from the fact that for an ideal conductor (infinite
magnetic Reynolds number) the magnetic field is frozen into the medium
and the magnetic flux through any fluid contour (comoving with the
fluid) is conserved. It would seem that this implies that the number of
magnetic lines that pass through a given contour can be doubled only
with the help of diffusion, i.e., any dynamo is slow.
However, freezing of the field precludes a fast growth of the magnetic
flux through a comoving contour while the dynamo can lead to an
increase of the flux through a fixed contour connected with a given body.
Obviously, when the comoving contour is deformed at an exponentially
large rate, the flux through a fixed contour can grow exponentially. A
specific example of such a process was proposed by one of the authors
(Ya. B.Z.) in 1972 at a lecture in Krakow. As illustrated in Fig. 9.2, a
magnetic rope should be stretched, twisted to form a figure eight, and
doubled on itself; the resulting magnetic flux is twice its initial value.
Probably, the pattern of the deformation of the magnetic lines in any fast
dynamo is similar to this simple procedure in rerum natura (Zeldovich
etai, 1983).
It is clear that the velocity field that is able to produce such twistings
and foldings should be rather complicated. When this conceptual model
is formalized (Moffatt and Proctor, 1985), the corresponding velocity
field turns out to be non-stationary and reproduces itself only in certain
period. For a non-stationary velocity field in (1), the magnetic field
cannot grow exponentially as an eigensolution. The growth rate y
characterizes, e.g., the time-averaged growth rate.
It is as yet unclear whether or not a stationary velocity field can act as a
fast dynamo. The existing examples of a fast dynamo in a steady velocity

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

MAGNETIC FIELD IN CONDUCTIVE FLUID

243

Fig. 9.2. The fast dynamo. The growth rate of the magneticfieldhere is independent of the
magnetic diffusivity when the latter is small.

field are given either in a curved space (Arnold et ai, 1981) or in velocity
fields with weakly singular vorticity (Soward, 1987). The only thing
which is clear is the fact that these examples are too complicated to be a
realistic flow model of cosmic plasmas, which are non-steady and,
moreover, often turbulent.
9.2. THE SHORT-CORRELATED RANDOM FLOW
The situation with fast dynamo described in the last section tempts one
to suggest a radical idea that the simplest flow that admits fast growth of
the magnetic field is a random flow which is stationary only on average.
This idea was first clearly proposed by M. Steenbeck, F. Krause and K..H. Radler (see Moffatt, 1978; Krause and Radler, 1980) who considered
the growth of magnetic field in a random flow as the growth of the mean
magnetic field. This idea has allowed us to understand the origin of the
large-scale magnetic fields in planets, stars and galaxies. Meanwhile,
Batchelor (1950), Kazantsev (1967), Kraichnan and Nagarajan (1957),

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

244

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

Vainstein and Zeldovich (1972) have considered the growth of magnetic
fluctuations. In the eighties the phenomenon of magnetic intermittency
was discovered based on the studies of the fast dynamo in a random flow;
intermittency is manifested as the difference of the growth rates of
different statistical moments of the magnetic field (Molchanov et al.,
1985). The problem of the growth of a typical realization of magnetic
field was also formulated.
In this chapter we shall consider that direction of development of the
hydromagnetic dynamo theory which has led to the idea of intermittency.
Various aspects of applications of the dynamo theory are discussed, e.g.,
by Parker (1979), Zeldovich et al. (1983) and Ruzmaikin et al. (1988).
The problem of describing magnetic field evolution in a real turbulence
is by no means easier than the dynamo problem of a stationary velocity
field. However, there exists a simple model of random flow for which the
analysis of a dynamo can be completed. This model is a short-correlated
flow of incompressible conducting fluid.
The concept of the short-correlated flow can be introduced as follows.
Consider a random velocity field vA(r, t, (o) with a) as the random
parameter, which is steady over every time interval [«A, (n + 1) A) of
length A while velocity fields in any two different intervals are statist­
ically independent. In other words, the flow renovates in every period A.
To a certain extent, suchflowcan serve as a model of turbulent flows with
exponentially decaying correlations. However, in contrast to turbulent
flows, this flow is not exactly stationary on average since the period of
variation of its statistical properties is equal to A. The short-correlated
flow can be obtained as the limiting case of the renovatingflowfor A -» 0.
Of course, the velocity field of the short-correlated flow is a generalized
function of time, analogous to Dirac's delta-function. When introducing
the delta-function, one considers a sequence of functions /,(*) concen­
trated over a short-interval of length ~ 1 /n whose integrals are unity. The
delta-function is understood as a limit of this sequence when the
localization region shrinks to zero (n -* oo). The integrals remain equal to
unity only when f„~ n. Quite similarly, the limiting transition to the
short-correlated flow means that the velocity uA modulus is of the order
A_1/2. This ensures a constant value of the mean squared velocity as A
tends to zero.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

MAGNETIC HELD IN CONDUCTIVE FLUID

245

Strictly speaking, the flows cannot be short-correlated in the same
sense as there are no absolute black bodies or material points. A realistic
criterion of closeness to the short-correlation model can be, e.g., the ratio
of the renovation time A to the "eddy turnover" time l/v, where / and v
are the characteristic scale and velocity of the flow, respectively. For a
classical Kolmogorov turbulence, A ~ l/v, and it cannot be approximated
by a short-correlated flow. Nevertheless, the results of the shortcorrelated models can be reasonably extrapolated to the Kolmogorov
turbulence because the correlation time A is usually several times smaller
than the magnetic field growth time y which, in turn, is somewhat larger
than l/v.
It is remarkable, however, that the existent random flows sometimes
deviate from the Kolmogorov type and the approximation of short
correlations is quite reasonable for them. For instance, the turbulence in
gaseous discs of galaxies is driven by the explosions of the supernova
stars. The explosions are a result of physical processes inside stars and are
practically independent of the interstellar processes. A resulting inter­
stellar turbulent eddy evolves so slowly that before it decays another
supernova explodes in its immediate vicinity, thus wiping out the
memory of the previous explosion even before this occurs purely
hydrodynamically. The ratio of the renovation time and the turnover
time varies from one position to another in a galaxy. But in the central
parts of galaxies, the short-correlation approximation seems to be
adequate.
9 3 . GENERATION OF THE MEAN MAGNETIC FIELD
The simplest result of the action of chaotic motions on a large-scale
magnetic field embedded in a moving fluid is the tangling of magnetic
lines. Due to the stretching of fluid elements, the magnetic energy can
grow locally, but at first sight it can hardly be expected that the large-scale
magnetic field would grow rather than decay. On the other hand, largescale magnetic fields are a typical property of cosmic bodies. It turns out
that the generation of large-scale magnetic fields by small-scale motions
is associated with a special property of turbulence which is the mean
helicity. In cosmic turbulent flows the numbers of vortices with left-

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

246

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

handed and right-handed helicities are not equal. The average scalar
product of the turbulent velocity and its curl, (y-V X V), is called the
mean helicity. The physical reason for non-vanishing of the mean helicity
is the overall rotation of density-stratified cosmic bodies. When a
turbulent vortex expands in a rotating volume, the Coriolis force
produces an extra rotation so that vortices with some definite helicity
become dominating. The mean helicity has opposite signs in the northern
and southern hemispheres. Helicity is a pseudoscalar quantity; such
quantity can be constructed from the angular velocity of a rotation il and
the density gradient: £l-\p.
The mean helicity is a source of self-organization of the medium, it
opposes the destructive action of turbulent tangling. Let us demonstrate
this by taking a homogeneous, isotropic turbulence as an example. For
the sake of simplicity here we consider the short-correlated velocity field.
Rejection of this approximation leads to a considerably more complicat­
ed calculation but does not change the final conclusion that the largescale magnetic field can be generated in helical turbulence.
The problem of evolution of the mean magnetic field in a random
helical flow requires a derivation of the equation for the first statistical
moment B(x, t) = (H(x, *))• For a short-correlated flow, this equation
can be derived in the same manner as the equation for the moments of a
scalar field in a short-correlated potential (Section 7.6). The resulting
equation reads
3D

— = V X («B) + j?AB.

(5)

The coefficients a and fi characterize the random flow. The former is
proportional to the mean helicity, a = —5(v-V X v). The latter is the
sum of the turbulent and molecular diffusions which play a leading role
in transferring the admixtures in gases and fluids when directed flows are
absent. It is the turbulent (or the closely associated convective) transfer
which allows any scientist to feel the smell of a perfume after a few
seconds when a lady enters his room. Taking for illustration the
molecular diffusivity of ethyl spirit vapour in as air v = 10 - 5 m 2 s~', we
see that the spread of this admixture due to molecular diffusion in a room

MAGNETIC FIELD IN CONDUCTIVE FLUID

247

of the size r = 3 m takes a time

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

t = r2/v^ 10 6 s^ 10 days.
Meanwhile, the air motions induced, e.g., by the lady walking along have
a characteristic velocity 1 ms - 1 and a scale 1 m, which implies that the
turbulent diffusivity is 1 m 2 s _l . This diffusivity determines a spreading
time of the order of 0.1 minute for the perfume in the room.
Let us verify that equation (5) includes the self-excitation of the mean
magnetic field. For this purpose, consider the evolution of an initial
magnetic field represented by a single Fourier mode:
b(k, 0 = ^ (k) 'b 0 (k), B(x, 0 = b(k, t)eA\

(6)

Substituting (6) into (5) we obtain the following equation for the growth
rate y(k) and the generated field distribution:
y(k)b0(k) = iak Xb0-

0k2bo.

(7)

This system of three algebraic equations can be solved easily when one of
the axes, e.g., the z-axis of the reference system, is chosen to be parallel to
the wave vector k. Then the solenoidality of magnetic field implies that b0
has only two non-vanishing components, bx and by, so that (7) reduces to
ybx = —ikaby — 0k2 bx,
yby = —ikabx — fik2by.
This system of equations has solutions with a growth rate
y = ak - 0k2,
which is positive for a > 0 and k > a/fi. The spatial field distribution can
be described as a helical wave with right polarization. For negative a, the
wave has left polarization and y = —ak — /Ik1.
The helical magnetic waves with different wave vectors grow at

248

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

different rates (Fig. 9.3). Self-excitation of the mean magnetic field in an
infinite homogeneous medium is possible for any intensity of the helical
motions: for arbitrarily small a, there exist long-wavelength modes for
which the generating action of helicity dominates over the destructive
action of diffusion. Therefore, the generated field is always the large-scale
one. The field of the scale

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

kn =

2P

grows most rapidly. The corresponding growth rate is given by
y(ko) = a2/(4/?)- This means that an initial distribution of a weak
magnetic field evolves into a distribution with distinguished scale 2nk^',
i.e., the field becomes structured.
In cosmic objects (stars, galaxies, etc.), magnetic field generation is
more complicated. Apart from helicity, it depends on its differential
rotation, the shape of the generation region, and other factors. However,
many features of the simple picture described, particularly the magnetic
structures, are preserved in these realistic dynamo systems (see Parker,
1979; Zeldovich et al., 1983). For instance, various magnetic structures
are observed in the nearby galaxies (Ruzmaikin et al., 1988).

Fig. 9.3. The growth rate of the mean magnetic field versus the wave number k.

MAGNETIC FIELD IN CONDUCTIVE FLUID

249

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

9.4. FLUCTUATIONS OF HELICITY
The problem of self-excitation of magnetic field by the motions of
turbulent fluid was motivated by the inquiry into the origin of magnetism
of planets, stars and galaxies. In these applications, most interesting are
the large-scale magnetic fields which can be distinguished against the
background of the fluctuation fields generated simultaneously.
Also of interest is the question of magnetic field generation by bulk
motions of liquid metal in industrial devices, e.g., breeder reactors
(Kirko et ai, 1981; Frisch et ai, 1985) and metallurgical installations
(Mestel, 1984). These flows are characterized by the Reynolds numbers
of the order of 107 and, therefore, they are turbulent. The magnetic
Reynolds numbers are not so large and do not exceed 10-100; neverthe­
less, these values are sufficient to make possible the growth of magnetic
fields. Unlike astrophysical conditions, here the relevant volumes are
only moderate and the overall rotation is absent; both these factors play
an outstanding role in the generation of astrophysical large-scale mag­
netic fields. In the abovementioned industrial devices, excitation of
small-scale, fluctuational magnetic fields is plausible. This conjecture is
substantiated by experimental results (Kirko et ai, 1981) which indeed
suggest generation of magnetic fields, but of another type than that
predicted by the mean-field dynamo theory based on the mean helicity of
turbulence.
The problem of self-excitation of magnetic field in a flow which is
reflectionally symmetric on average is also important for some astrophysical objects, e.g., the intergalactic gas in galaxy clusters.
This problem has proved to be considerably more complicated than
the problem of the origin of the mean magnetic field in a helical random
flow. Although the pioneering paper of Batchelor (1950), devoted to selfexcitation of fluctuative magnetic fields in a non-helical turbulent flow,
preceded by several years the papers of Parker and Steenbeck et ai,
which developed the idea of helical turbulent mean field dynamo,
systematic study of the former problem has not been completed up to
now. Partly, the complexity of this problem is associated with the fact
that the following two approaches, which seem to be equivalent, turn out
to be basically different. The first approach in studying the small-scale
magnetic fields consists in the derivation and analysis of the equation

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

250

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

governing their correlation tensor. Such an equation was first derived by
Kazan tsev (1967) and Kraichnan and Nagarajan (1967) in the case of the
short-correlated flow. The results of such analysis are discussed in
Section 9.6 below.
Another seemingly equivalent approach is due to Kraichnan (1976),
who has proposed the following tempting idea as to how to bypass the
complexities of analysis of the equation for the correlation tensor. The
vanishing of the mean helicity does not imply that v-V X v identically
vanishes everywhere. Such vanishing occurs only for relatively simple
degenerated flows. In general, vanishing of the mean helicity occurs
owing to compensations of the values of helicity which acquire different
signs and values for different moments, positions and different realiza­
tions of a random flow. This observation suggests the idea of considering
the generation of magnetic fields by fluctuations of the helicity. More
rigorously, one may consider a turbulent flow characterized by two
random parameters (e.g., characterizing the turbulent motion within a
star and stellar encounters in the example below). Even though this
problem is not motivated by any particular experimental or observa­
tional results, it seems reasonable in connection with, e.g., the random
flows within a rotating star. Such flow has a mean helicity whose sign is
determined by the direction of the star's rotation. Consider a star that is
subject to external forces and therefore changes the modulus and
direction of its angular velocity (for instance, this can be a star near the
center of a globular cluster where gravitational encounters are frequent).
If the relaxation time of the internal random flows is shorter than the
time between the encounters, the helicity averaged over both the random
factors (the intrinsic hydrodynamic random ensemble and the external
force) is zero. Let us consider the evolution of the magnetic field in such a
random medium.
Partial averaging of the magnetic field over the ensemble of realiza­
tions of random hydrodynamic flows within the star leads to equation
(5). The next step is averaging over the external forces.
For the sake of simplicity, consider a uniform and constant turbulent
diffusivity /?. We also assume that a is uniform and renovates with period
T, and (a) = 0.
The magnetic field in a random medium with two independent
random parameters can be averaged over either of them separately. We

251

MAGNETIC HELD IN CONDUCTIVE FLUID

denote the field averaged over the turbulent ensemble within a star by B,
while the result of the additional averaging over helicity fluctuations is
denoted by (B). Consider an initial field in the form of a helical wave
with the wave vector directed along the z-axis and positive helicity:
V X B0 = +kB0, B0(z) = (sin kz; cos kz; 0). Substituting in (5) B(x, t) =
b(t)B0(\), we obtain the following equation for b(t):

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

db
— = (ak - 0k2)b,
where a(t, (o) is the random coefficient. Evidently, its solution is given by

b(t) = b0 exp ( -0k2t + k I a(s, w)ds J.
*
o
'

(8)

Following the central limit theorem for t -*■ oo, the integral in (8) can be
estimated as J'0a ds m (a) t + T l/2 (a 2 ) l/2 ^ l/2 , where £ is a random quan­
tity with unit dispersion. Since (a) = 0, this integral grows as t,n.
Consequently, the solution b(t) decays asymptotically. On the other
hand, the mean field grows for (a2)1'2 > 20. This can be seen from the
fact that for small A: we have approximately

(b(t)) _ 4 b „ p ( - 0 f t + * ! ^ ) ,

^
oo

(9)

where we have used the fact that £ is a Gaussian random quantity with
zero mean value and unit dispersion. Relation (9) is exact for a shortcorrelated helicity.
Thus, fluctuations of a introduce a negative contribution to the
diffusivity of magnetic fields. This becomes especially obvious when,
using (9), the equation for the mean magnetic field is recast as

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

252

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

One can easily verify that the higher moments of (bp) grow pro­
gressively, i.e., the field distribution is intermittent.
These results are valid for the particular form of initial field. In fact, an
arbitrary initial field can be expanded in helical waves with various
directions of the wave vector k and signs of the waves' helicity. Notice
that for the negative-helicity waves of the type B0(x) = (cos kz, sin kz, 0),
the sign of the second term in the exponent of (8) changes. However, this
does not change the behaviour of the mean field. In a generic situation,
due to the contribution of modes with small k, a typical realization of the
field decays as a power law (as /~ 3 ' 2 in three dimensions) rather than
exponentially. The statistical moments also show progressive growth.
Such behaviour occurs for moderate values of helicity dispersion,
(a2)^{a2)„ = 2/?/T. When (a2) exceeds this critical value, the diffusion
coefficient in (10) becomes negative. Taken literally, this means that the
super-exponential growth of the mean field is accompanied by a large
decrease in its scale. This process is exactly the inverse of the well known
diffusive spreading. However, the short-correlation approximation soon
becomes inapplicable in this case and field evolution depends on the
detailed properties of the helicity correlation function.
9.5. HIGHER STATISTICAL MOMENTS AND
INTERMITTENCY IN THE FAST DYNAMO
Let us return to random flows characterized by a single random
parameter. As we have already noted, the study of the properties of selfexcited magnetic field assumes the derivation of the moment equations
for the magnetic field and the investigation of their properties. These
equations usually are very cumbersome and it is instructive to begin with
the case of small magnetic diffusivity where phenomena of the type of
intermittency are more strongly pronounced (Molchanov et ai,
Zeldovich et ai, 1987).
Let us explicitly evaluate the growth rates of a typical realization of a
magnetic field and all its moments in the limiting case of large magnetic
Reynolds numbers and flows with short, 5-function-like time correla­
tions. The existing theorem for solving the induction equation and some
estimates of the growth rates for such a flow have been obtained by
Rozovsky ef a/. (1984).

MAGNETIC FIELD IN CONDUCTIVE FLUID

253

The adopted asymptotic method is based on the fact that the growth
rates of magnetic field and its moments in three-dimensional random
flows, in the limit of a large magnetic Reynolds number, coincide with
the growth rates calculated in neglect of magnetic diffusion (Molchanov
et al, 1984). This makes the Lagrangian solution of the induction
equation useful. Thus, the problem reduces to the analysis of the field
evolution H(x, /) along the Lagrangian path

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

\t = x +

/

v(^, s) ds,

determined solely by the prescribed divergence-free velocity field v(x, t).
According to the induction law, in a short period At the field changes
according to
//,&+*, t + At) = (<J„ + ^ " ° A / j Hfa, 0,

ij = 1, 2, 3. (11)

Consider the velocity field with a vanishing average velocity. Then the
property of (^-correlation of the velocity field is equivalent to every
element of the matrix W^ = (dvJdxj) being a Wiener random process
with zero mean value and a certain dispersion. Additionally we suppose
that the velocity field is statistically homogeneous and has an isotropic
probability distribution. Then the matrix Wtj can be represented as
Wu = aw5,j + aw,j,

(12)

where a and a are constants while w and w,; are independent Wiener pro­
cesses with unit dispersion. The first term on the right-hand side of (12) is
obviously isotropic. Generally speaking, any particular realization of the
second matrix is anisotropic. However, the distribution of w,7 is
isotropic. To show this, we prove that this tensor distribution remains
unaffected under orthogonal transformations. Since the matrix wu is
Gaussian, it is sufficient to transform it by the orthogonal matrix Uu, ty
= UikUtj, Wu, and verify that the correlator (vv,yM>mrt) coincides with

254

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

(tfyW„„). The solenoidality of the velocity field additionally implies that
the trace of matrix Wtj vanishes. This gives
w

u =

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

1 dv, dvt
2~^^m
1 dvt dvk

21* ~to

(A

o\wij--wu8ij),

{Wi W

' ^

,

,

°

(Wii Wu)

=8ffA/

,/
=

(13)

'
1

° V

ikdjl

~3

\

SljSu

)

At

'

where wu is the trace of matrix wu. The symbol (...) here denotes
averaging over the Wiener process and the bar denotes averaging over the
velocity field distribution.
It would seem that the expression (12) should be supplemented by one
more term of the form e^w*, with eiJk being the unit antisymmetric
tensor. Since the Wiener process is invariant under reflection of spatial
coordinates, this term has an isotropic probability distribution but, in
contrast to wu, it is a pseudo-tensor rather than a tensor. Note that the helicity of a flow, which is an essential property for magnetic field
generation, is connected with the pseudo-scalar part of the velocity
correlation tensor. In terms of the matrix Wu, the helicity is expressed
through correlators of the type {Wuvk).
Let us derive the equation that describes the evolution of the squared
magnetic field along a Lagrangian path. From (12)—(13) we obtain
H\t + At) = H\t) + ( 2 ^ y ^ r + Wi>W*^r)

H

The quantity 2WuHiHj/H2 is a linear combination of Wiener processes
and therefore this is also a Wiener process with zero average value and a
dispersion 8<r2/3, which follows from (13). Since the correlation time of
the Wiener process is short compared with At, the central limit theorem

MAGNETIC FIELD IN CONDUCTIVE FLUID

255

allows us to replace the second term in the parentheses by 8er2A//3.
Finally, the limit At -* 0 yields the desired equation:
dH
8\l/2
<tf/22 _ //8V

,
8 J
awdt + - a2dt.
3
U

2

H

The solution to this equation is given by

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

H\t) = // 2 (0)exp[(®J ' mv, + ^ 2 / J .

(14)

Since >v, grows only as t1'2, for / » a'2 the first term in the exponent may
be neglected. Thus, the growth rate of the magnetic field is
y = hm

InH

l~m

4 ,
= - a .
3

t

Now we can evaluate the growth rate of the 2p-th moment of the
magnetic field modulus. Raising expression (14) to the p-th power and
averaging over the velocity field with the use of the relation (exp(/w,)
= exp(p2//2)), we obtain
ln(// 2 ')
8 , 4 , ,
\
' =-po1 + -p2o2,

ft,-hm
(—00

y2p_4a2
2p
3

/

3

3'

(15)

2(72p
3

for arbitrary p. For a homogeneous isotropic flow with longitudinal
correlation function
F(r) = exp

i-m

256

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

we have
(At)2 = 6 - At,

- ^

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

dXj dXj

I

where v and / are the characteristic velocity and scale of the flow. Thus,
y2/2 = 3/4 v/l for the flow.
We have derived the rates of growth of the field and its moments along
the Lagrangian trajectory. Due to homogeneity, the growth rates at a
given Eulerian position x are the same.
Now we can easily understand how the magnetic field evolves in a
short-correlated and unsteady average medium. In this case a becomes a
function of time so that ah in (14) should be substituted by its average
value over the considered period:
t

I a\s) ds.
o
Thus, when a decreases with t rapidly enough, the field growth can
become a power law in time and the intermittent strong gradients of the
field strength cease to grow.
For vm = 0, the spatial structure of the moments is described by the
eigenvectors of a certain operator Ap derived by Molchanov et ai, (1987).
The corresponding random magnetic field is a generalized function of
position. In order to obtain the structure of the moments for small but
finite vm, the next approximation in vm should be invoked. This kind of
derivation of the growth rates and the corresponding eigenfunctions in
two successive orders of the perturbation theory is typical, e.g., of the
quasi-classical approximation (Maslov and Fedorjuk, 1981).
9.6. STRUCTURE OF THE MAGNETIC FIELD
We have seen that for a short-correlated flow of conducting fluid with a
high magnetic Reynolds number, the self-excited field is such that the
second, the fourth and higher moments of the magnetic field are

MAGNETIC FIELD IN CONDUCTIVE FLUID

257

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

determined not by the typical values of the growing field but rather by its
rate realizations (outbursts). In order to elucidate the structure of the
field, one should consider the moment equations in more detail. Here we
consider the second moment.
In a inhomogeneous, anisotropic short-correlated flow, this equation
can be obtained using the technique of Wiener integration and expansion
in short correlation time, as described by Molchanov et al. (1985). This
somewhat cumbersome equation has the following form:
dffu(x , y , 0
dt'.

/d»,(x) *>;(y)\
\ dx, dy„ I
1 d /

+-

k

dv\
dx,/

dvk
dy,

dv\
dyj

/
\

dx,l dy„

\ k

dx, I dyk

2.dyk \

\

1 d J dvk
2 dxk \ dx,

dvAdH.j
dx,l dxk

2
I
dvj(y)\ dHa , ,
/ ^ d Hu
- (ot(x)—— ) - — + (v,(\)vm(y))-——
\
dy, I dxk
dx,dxm

(

1

\ d2H0

/

1

\ d2H,j

+ \vmSu + -(vkv,)y)
,
\
2
7 dykdy,

(16)

where
HiJ(x,y,t)^(Hi(x,t)HJ(y,t))
(Molchanov et ai, 1983). Let us consider this equation in the case of
statistically homogeneous, isotropic and reflectionally invariant velocity

258

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

field whose correlation tensor is given by
%

/

lv[

r dF (

r,r.\"|

(»,(x)t>,-(y)) = - Ky(x, y) = - \F(r)Su + - — \3U - -£ j J , (17)

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

r = x-y,

r = |r|,

(Monin and Yaglom, 1971) where we have singled out the dimensional
factors / = So F(r)dr, the correlation length and the r.m.s. velocity
fluctuation. The longitudinal correlation function is dimensionless, it
equals unity at the origin, has a positive Fourier transform and decays at
infinity.
Let us consider the solution that grows at the greatest rate. It is natural
to presume that it has the same symmetries as the velocity field:
1
r dW (
r,r\
Hu{r, t) = - W(r, t) S„ + --^r [Su - - ^ j .

(18)

As shown by Kazantsev (1967), this assumption reduces (16) to an
equation which is close to the Schrodinger equation but features a
variable mass and has no imaginary unity in the time-derivative term.
This equation takes a simpler form when it is formulated in terms of an
auxiliary function \[/(r, t). This is related to the longitudinal correlation
function of magnetic field W through the relation
r2
3(2w(r))1/2
where r is the separation of the positions for which the correlation is
evaluated and m{r) is the variable "mass" defined through
1
2m

,

\~F(r)
3

Here e is the inverse magnetic Reynolds number. Below, all quantities are

259

MAGNETIC HELD IN CONDUCTIVE FLUID

made dimensionless by being measured in /, v and their combinations.
Kazantsev's equation reads

1 ty
2 dt

1
d2i
2m(r) dr2

(20)

U(r)+,

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

where the potential U(r) is given by
1
2r

df
dr

1
mr2

8/w3

\dr)'

with
1 d
3r2dr

,

The qualitative dependencies of the effective mass m and potential C/are
shown in Fig. 9.4.
The solution to equation (20) is sought in the form ip(r, t) = \f/(r)
exp(2y0 which is equivalent to the formulation of the boundary-value

Fig. 9.4. The forms of potential (a) and mass (b) in the problem of self-excitation of the
second moment of magnetic field.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

260

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

problem for eigenfunction f(r) in potential U(r) with boundary condi­
tions ^(0) = ^(oo) = 0. To be more exact the condition W(0) = 1
reduces to \p ~ r2 for r -+ 0 (see (19)). The existence of growing solutions
of the equation (20) was shown by Kazantsev (1967) and Vainstein
(1980). A detailed study of the problem was accomplished by Novikov et
al. (1983) and Maslova et al. (1985) for a number of typical forms of the
function F(r). Here we present the asymptotic solution of equation (20)
for the considered limiting case e -* 0 in the special case/(r) = exp(—r2)
(Artamonova and Sokoloff, 1986). The following properties of f(r) are
essential: normalization conditions /(0) = 1 and f"(0) = — 2, and
smoothness/'"(0) = 0. It is natural to expect that in the limit e -» 0 the
solution concentrates at small r, i.e., near the bottom of the potential well
U(r), so that U(r) and (2m) -1 can be replaced by
r4
/^l-r2 + -,
1
r2
r4
— ^e + - - — ,
2m
5
14

(21)

3
1/25 + 2e/7
C / - - -5 + r 2 / 1 4 - 1 / 5 - e / r 2
8r2

2e

7

r

+ — + —.
2
The minimal value of the potential U for e = 0 is equal to —4/5.
Therefore, the maximal growth rate y(e) cannot exceed 4/5. (We recall
that the transformation to dimensional units is accomplished by multi­
plying y with «//.) We shall see that, after deriving the asymptotic
solution, that actually the maximal growth rate is somewhat smaller than
4/5.
The potential reaches its minimum for

= (f)" 4

MAGNETIC FIELD IN CONDUCTIVE FLUID

261

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

and the corresponding potential well is rather wide. Since we expect the
solutions to concentrate near this point, it is natural to introduce a new
stretched variable £ = re~l/4 so that in the new variable the potential is a
slowly varying function of £ even at the boundary of the well. Note that
the introduction of the scale e ,/4 is rather unusual and farther from the
flat bottom of the well appears another natural scale e1/2 corresponding to
a boundary layer at r = 0.
In terms of the new variable,

where

vw

3

15 ,

?

14 s

We see that the potential is nearly constant near the minimum point
where the eigenfunction is concentrated. Its variation is pronounced
either at small r (£~ e1/4, i.e., r~em) or for r = 0(1) (£~ e" I/4 ).
After omitting a small variable part of the potential we obtain the
following equation
£ V " + ( 4 - 5 y ) * = 0,

(22)

which can be easily solved.
Now the solutions to equation (22) should be matched with the
solutions at small r of the order e l/2 (inner region) and large r of the order
of unity (outer region), i.e., with the solutions in the regions where
variations of the potential are considerable. The solutions for the inner
and outer regions are found to be
B(re-l/2)2,

Hr)= '

r^rl

}

<- A

Cexpl--/•),

= aeU2

r^r2 = b,

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

262

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

where a and b are certain constants whose values are determined below.
As usual, both the function \p and its derivatives should be matched. The
solution of equation (22) is such that the derivatives of ^ at r = r, and
r— r2 are smaller by a factor In e than ^ itself. Consequently, the
matching should be accomplished simultaneously in two orders of
asymptotic expansion in e. To the first order, we seek the function \f>w(r)
which satisfies the equation (22), vanishes at r, and r2 and is identically
zero in the inner and outer regions. Afterwards, we compensate for the
mismatch of the derivatives of ^(1> at r, and r2 with the use of the secondorder correction \pi2) at r{ <s r ^ r2 and the leading-order solutions in the
inner and outer regions; simultaneously, matching of the second-order
approximation of the eigenfunction is accomplished. As a result, the
asymptotic eigenvalue is obtained from the leading-order equations
while the eigenfunction which is satisfactory in all three regions is
obtained from the equations of two lowest orders.
We note that this asymptotic procedure is a variant of the quasiclassical approximation for which the derivation of the eigenvalues and
the corresponding eigenfunctions from the equations of two consequent
orders is rather typical (Maslov and Fedorjuk, 1981). The constants a and
b do not enter the first-order solution because the term In (a/b), to which
they combine, is much smaller than In e; therefore, we can put a = b = 1
without loss of generality.
The procedure described above leads to the following leading-order
solution:

4

i

{

U

'

,23,

^ = A,r,/2sin(^lnrj,
where n = 1, 2, 3 , . . . enumerates the eigenfunctions (cf. (15)).
Now we are in a position to evaluate the growth rate of the second
moment of the magnetic field for vanishing magnetic diffusivity. Let us
put e = 0 in (21) and determine the upper bound of the spectrum for the
corresponding equation (20). We expect again that the solution is
concentrated at small r. We therefore introduce a new variable x = r/a

MAGNETIC HELD IN CONDUCTIVE FLUID

263

with a « 1. To the leading order in a~' we again obtain equation (22)
which does not include a. Introducing the other variables f = xl^2p(x)
and x = exp y, we obtain for \p(y) the one-dimensional Laplace equation

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

</V

/

15\

whose spectrum has zero upper bound. Consequently, y(0) = 3/4.
Comparing this result with (23), we see that y(e) continuously matches
y(0) for e -» 0 even though y approaches this limit only logarithmically.
The limiting transition y(e) -+ y(0) occurs only for a three-dimensional
velocity field. For two-dimensional velocity fields, the potential U(r) is
positive everywhere (see Appendix in Novikov et ai, 1983). Thus, in two
dimensions for e # 0, the second moment of magnetic field experiences
only a temporal growth (Zeldovich, 1956) with subsequent exponential
decay.
Matching the asymptotic solutions to the second order, one can
complete the derivation of the eigenfunctions of Kazantsev's equation
and elaborate the expression for the eigenvalue by adding the next
approximation y2. We do not give here the corresponding bulky
equations (see Kleeorin et ai, 1986) but only illustrate them graphically.
The correlation function which corresponds to the leading mode is
shown schematically in Fig. 9.5. The scale r{ ~ R^nl corresponds to the
skin-layer thickness with W(rx) = 0.82. At r = r2 the correlation function
vanishes while at r = r3 it attains its minimal value. The exact values of r2
and r3 depend on the detailed structure of/(r) as well as the exact distance
r4 = / at which the correlation function becomes exponentially decaying
and W(rA)« -R~i/4 (recall that Rm ■ e~l).
We propose the following interpretation of these characteristic scales
based on the presumption that the stretch-twist-fold rope dynamo of
Fig. 9.5 represents the basic process of field amplification in turbulence.
The range (r2, r4) corresponds to the scatter in lengths of the initial loop
of the magnetic lines. The mode number corresponds to the number of
full rotations which the loop experiences when being twisted. The
distance r2 determines the size of the folded part of the loop. The anticorrelated tail is due to the solenoidality condition of magnetic field

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

264

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

Fig. 9.5. (a) The first mode of the correlation function of the magnetic field excited by a
mirror-symmetric, short-correlatedflow,(b) and (c) Schematic views of the concentrations
of the excited field during rope stretching (b) and twisting (c).

(closeness of the loops) which reduces to
00

I Wr2dr = Q

o
(note that some magnetic lines can close themselves at infinity). A certain
fraction of the magnetic lines extends from the correlation cell to infinity.

MAGNETIC FIELD IN CONDUCTIVE FLUID

265

This fraction can be estimated as

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

\wrUr

I

^ r * ( l + I i - ) " ' .

The generated fluctuational magnetic field can be described as an
ensemble of thin loops oriented at random and strongly elongated. The
thickness of the loops is of the order of //?„,l/2. Between the scales lR^,in
and IR~"*, the field decreases by a factor In RJnR'1'4 which is of the
order 102 for the Sun for which Rm ~ 108.
Several modes are excited simultaneously for sufficiently large mag­
netic Reynolds numbers. It can be easily seen that the critical Rm for the
k-th mode is estimated as

i.e.,
R™K26,

^ ' a 6 . 6 X 102, R™ ss 1.7 X 104.

Comparison with numerical calculations shows that these asymptotic
values are underestimates; a more accurate estimate is R.% « 102.
When Rm is considerably higher than this critical value, the growth
rates of the first two modes become very close. For instance, for
Rm= 10* we obtain (yx — yi)/yi » 0 . 1 . In this case the resulting cor­
relation function of the magnetic field is a combination of the two lowest
modes with comparable weights. (The third mode has a considerably
lower growth rate and can probably be neglected.)
The second mode is shown in Fig. 9.6. Here r, = 1.8/?^,l/2/, r2 =
0.1 R~U4l, and r3 = 0.6/?ml/4/, while W(rx)« 0.82, W(rj) = - 1 / 8 R~m,
and W(r,) ~ /?~ 5/4 . The basic process that leads to the excitation of this
mode is suggested to be the folding of doubly twisted and stretched
magnetic loops shown in Fig. 9.6.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

266

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

r

1

r

2 ^ 3

r

4 r5

r

6

a

Fig. 9.6. (a) The second mode of the correlation function of the magneticfieldexcited by a
mirror-symmetric, short-correlated flow, (b) Schematic view of the concentrations of the
excited field.

Let us briefly mention the applications of these results. In the
interstellar gas of our galaxy, Rm ~ 106 (based on the ambipolar diffusion
coefficient; Zeldovich et al., 1983), so that (ft — y2)/y\ ^ 0.2; thus, the
second mode can only be weak. Indeed, the observed correlator of the
synchrotron intensity obtained by Dagkesamansky and Shutenkov
(1987) strongly resembles that of the leading magnetic mode. For the Sun
we have Rm ~ 108 — 109 and both modes are excited with equal ease.
Apart from the basic scale of turbulence, the presence of two more
distinguished scales is expected, //?„ l/2 and //?„,'/4. The scale //?„,'/2 cannot
be observed from the Earth with the modern technique: IR^U2 ^ 1 km for
/ = 104 km (the supergranulation scale). The scale IR„UA corresponds to
a size ^ 100 km and is readily detected in observations of the solar
magnetic fields (Stenflo, 1976). We stress that both observations and
theory define this scale as the typical size of the regions with uniform sign
of the vertical magnetic field. The structure of these fine-structure
elements and the field strength in them are not connected with the mean,
regular magnetic field, i.e., they should not be correlated with the phase
of the solar activity cycle which is also confirmed by observations.
Our final remark has a general character. It can be shown that in the
limit of weak magnetic diffusion (large magnetic Reynolds numbers)
generation of small-scale magnetic fields, described in the present and

MAGNETIC FIELD IN CONDUCTIVE FLUID

267

previous sections, and generation of the mean (large-scale) magnetic field
are independent processes. For weak helicity, the generation of smallscale magnetic fields dominates and the resulting intermittent magnetic
structure is very prominent; for large helicities, the mean-field dynamo
dominates and the structures inherent in this type of dynamo can be
observed. The criterion in this competition is the relation between the
corresponding growth rates.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

9.7. THE TYPICAL STRUCTURE OF MAGNETIC FIELD
As we have emphasized above, the correlation function (the second
moment) of the chaotic magnetic field generated by the fast dynamo in a
random flow does not contain information on the structure of the typical
distribution of the magnetic field. This is due to the fact that the principal
contribution to the correlation function comes from widely spaced
concentrations of the magnetic field. Thus, in order to describe a typical
"background" magnetic field, we should filter out the contribution of
these concentrations. This can be accomplished by analyzing the
correlator of the magnetic field directions.
To describe the correlation of the magnetic field direction vectors,
e,(x, t) = //,(x, t)/H(x, t), i = 1, 2, 3, we introduce the tensor
e,j(\, y, /) * (e,(x, t)ej(y, 0),

(24)

where H(x, t) = [//,(x, :)//(-(x, t)]ul is the total field strength and the
angular brackets symbolize averaging over the magnetic field distribu­
tion, which is determined here by the velocity field distribution. Due to
the adopted normalization, strong maxima of the field strength introduce
in (24) contributions of order unity, same as the typical background
magnetic fields. However, field concentrations are rare and, therefore,
the dominant contribution to (24) comes from the typical fields.
Consider the random flow of an incompressible conducting fluid
whose correlation time is short when compared to the turnover time of
the dominant eddies. The evolutionary equation for the tensor (24) can
be derived from the general solution of the induction equation which is
given in terms of the average over the random trajectories of fluid
particles. Expansion of this solution in powers of At and substituting the

268

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

result into (24) yields the desired equation for etj (this technique is
discussed in detail in Section 8.6).
The resulting equation for etj is not closed because it includes higher
moments of the direction vector (up to the sixth moment). In order to
close the equation, we adopt a simplifying assumption that, like the
moment of a Gaussian random field, these higher correlators can be
represented as the products of various pair-wise correlators. This leads to
a closed equation for the correlator eu which is given here for the case
where the stationary solution (an analogue of the eigenfunction) is
isotropic:
*«to-^[c(r)Jy + *(r)^J,

(25)

where the desired functions c{r) and s(r) decay at infinity, c(0) = 1 and
s(0) = 0. Notice that in contrast to the velocity and the magnetic fields,
the vector e{ is not solenoidal, so that the correlator (25) cannot be
described by a single scalar function. Thus, we have

(1 +e-

F)c" +

T

+2

3/

T
2
- 2 F ' + - ( « + 1 -F)
2

FA

4 F2~\
+ — - \c'

1 /

5

1

^ ) " 4ir"(°>] c + [~F" + ~rF> ~ 2 7 + <e + ^7

2/
1 r

1

\

1 /
11

1
3

35 L

r

r

1 T

3

5

35 L

r

r

-^[F['

+F2-']s2c = 0,

3

4F2\1

2F2~\ 3
2

ic

r2 J

F2"| 2
cs
2
r J
(26)

269

MAGNETIC FIELD IN CONDUCTIVE FLUID

(1 +e-F)s"

+ (-F')c'

f

2

3/

T

4F2

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

L

r

2/
+ - ( F\' + 2F'2'

6F2\

-T5V "

- 4F'"(0) Is

F'2

F.

6

r

2

r2

r

1

Fi

"—r

6F2\\

F2 F[\
--F'2-2-2+-^\
3

F +4F

1/

2

1 /

T

+ -(£+ 1 - F) + -F'\s'

+

4F2\

-?-)

[F',' + F'2' ]53

9

3

4F 2 1c 2 5

- [ l 6 F [ ' + 12Fr + 7 ^ - 7 ^ ] ^ - = 0,

(27)

where e = 6vm/(iv) is inversely proportional to the magnetic Reynolds
number, the prime denotes derivatives with respect to r, all functions
being taken at the point r, F, = F + F'/2 and F2 = -r/2F'.
We analyze the nonlinear system of the equations (26), (27) in the
approximation of the small e, i.e., large Rm, using the asymptotic method
applied to the magnetic correlator in the last section. Let us put
F(r) = exp( —r2) with r measured in units of /and consider separately the
following three regions: 0 < r *£ ae'/2, ael/1 <r^b and b< r, where a and
b are constants of the order of unity which will be determined in the
course of the solution.

270

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

In the first region, we introduce the variable £ = re l/2 . Retaining only
the leading terms in e in (26), (27), we have
\2

24 1

102

(i + ere + |^(i + ?) +—z\c +—«
50 ,
35

2
\e

78\
35/

42f

T6

1241

U

35 J

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

(28)

(1 +Z2)s +—c-

\—
2 +

T2

18 1

5

\s

where the dots denote derivatives with respect to £. The system (28) has a
one-parametric family of solutions which satisfy the boundary condi­
tions c(0) = 1 and s{0) = 0. This family can be obtained, e.g., through
expansions in powers of £. The first terms of these series are given by

v

8 + C, ,
3

'

(29)

s($) = Qe + ....
In the second region we introduce the variable £ = re _1/4 . Again,
keeping in (26), (27) only the leading terms in £ we have
34
102
78
Z2C+ — CC + —-C-—
5=0,
(30)
8

42

156

where the dots denote derivatives with respect to £. When deriving these
equations, we expect that in the second region the desired solution is
small as compared with c(0) = 1 so that we can neglect the nonlinear

MAGNETIC HELD IN CONDUCTIVE FLUID

271

terms. Expressing 5 through c from the first equation of (30), we obtain
the fourth-order Euler equation for c which has the following four-para­
meter solution:
c(Q = C[C2 cos(J? In O + C3 sin(£ In {)]
(31)

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

+ C'[C, cos(<Hn C) + Q sin(<Hn £)],
where the constants a, 0, yand S can be obtained by numerical solution of
the fourth-order characteristic equation a = 2.35, /? = 2.08, y = —3.62
and 5 = 3.36.
In the third region, r > I in (26), (27) and we can put e = 0. The
resulting solution can be easily analyzed for T » 1, when (26), (27)
reduce to
2

25

c" +-c'
r

+ &c + —
2 = 0,

2
s" +-s'
r

6c
+ Ss + —2 = 0.
r

r

The only stationary solution of this system of equations is a fourparametric family of solutions which decay at infinity slower than r~\
This slow decay of the correlator probably means that for very large r the
stationary approximation (26), (27) is inapplicable and the complete
non-stationary problem should be considered, which describes the
propagation of the correlator front.
In order to obtain the complete asymptotic solution, all these asymp­
totic forms at the boundaries of all three regions should match. In the
framework of the adopted technique, the matching is carried out to two
successive orders in e. The leading order asymptotic allows us to match
the functions c and s, while matching of their derivatives is accomplished
with the help of the second-order solution. Such two-step matching is
necessary because the derivatives of the solution (31) have a higher order
in e than the functions themselves. As shown in Section 9.6, qualitatively
correct results can be obtained only when the functions are matched and
the values a = b = 1 are chosen while s vanishes both at the boundary

272

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

between the first and second regions and at the origin. At the boundary
between the second and third regions, we put c = s = 0 in order to
minimize the slowly decaying tail of the correlator. Here we restrict
ourselves to this crude approximation considering, for simplicity,
expressions (29) as exact. Keeping only the leading terms in e, the result
reads
r

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

1

^0

r2
e

, 0<r<

Je,

r*l,
(32)

0 0<r^y[e,
s(r) =

r^l

+9 3sin dln
~A7^[8-2"*{*,nI^)e"V
- { ^)]'\
A

e"VJ

'

^: < r ^ l

5
3cos(lne l / 4 )-sin(lne l / 4 )"

These functions are shown schematically in Fig. 9.7. Comparing the
solution (32) with the magnetic field correlator obtained in a similar
approximation in Section 9.6, we see that they are rather similar. By
order of magnitude, the maxima near the origin have equal widths which
indicates that even the weaker background magnetic field is concentrated
within the ropes and, possibly, skin-layers of thickness ~ yfs. The shape
of the ropes (and layers) is determined by the behaviour of the correlator
for e1/2 =s r / / « 1. The correlator (32) has ~ In Rm zeros within this range,
which can be interpreted as an indication of the presence of multi-twisted
ropes (see Section 9.6) with the twisting number ~ In Rm. Note that the
higher peaks that contain the major portion of the magnetic energy have
smaller twisting numbers of the order of unity.
Analyzing the derivation of (32), we notice that the specific closure
hypothesis for the equations (26), (27) is essential only for the solution in

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

MAGNETIC HELD IN CONDUCTIVE FLUID

a

273

b

Fig. 9.7. The schematic form of the functions c(r) (a) and s(r) (b).

the first region which describes the field distribution across a layer or
rope (the nonlinear terms that arise due to the closure of the equations
(26), (27) are essential only in this region). However, in practically
interesting cases of solar or galactic magnetic fields, these scales are so
small that the correlators c and s will hardly observable at these scales in
the foreseeable future. On the contrary, the scales associated with the
second region are in principle observable (see Section 9.6).
9.8. SELF-EXCITATION OF MAGNETIC FIELDS
IN FINITE BODIES
Above we have considered self-excitation of magnetic fields in spatially
unbounded, statistically homogeneous flows. Real flows are confined to
finite volumes. This introduces an additional effect that opposes field
generation: the field difFusionally leaks through the volume boundaries,
which leads to the additional excitation condition of sufficiently large
size of the volume as compared with the turbulent correlation scale. In
this section, we will consider this effect for the case of self-excitation of
fluctuative magnetic fields (Maslov et ai, 1987).
Consider the turbulent flow of a conducting fluid in a volume of
characteristic size L such that X = l/L « 1, where / is the correlation
scale of the velocity field. Suppose that some initial weak field is

274

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

embedded in the fluid. Tangling of magnetic lines leads to both the
growth and turbulent diffusion (along with the molecular one) of the
magnetic field correlation tensor (//,(x, 1)Hj(\, t)). In a homogeneous
flow, this tensor grows exponentially for large magnetic Reynolds
numbers Rm = lv/vm (here v is the characteristic amplitude of the
velocity pulsations and vm is the magnetic diffusivity). It can be expected
that for a weak inhomogeneity, A « 1, the correlation tensor evolves
according to the law

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

(//,(x, t)Hj(x, 0) = E(R, t)hu(T),
where R = (x + y)/2, r = x — y, hu is the correlation tensor (normalized
to unity: /i,;(0) = Su) for the corresponding homogeneous flow, the
quantity E is proportional to the magnetic energy density at position R.
The latter can be shown to obey the following Schrodinger-type equation:
YE = y(R)E + A2£>(R) AE

(33)

written in dimensionless variables with the distance R measured in units
of / and the time in units of l/v, where y is the growth rate of the
accompanying homogeneous flow problem, T is the global (true) growth
rate, and D is the turbulent diffusivity of magnetic energy. This equation
was proposed by Novikov et al. (1983). It can be derived from the
equation of the second moment of magnetic field in short-correlated flow
for A « 1. It is presumed that the flow is locally isotropic and
reflectionally symmetric. The spatial part of the correlation tensor for
such flow can be represented as

where Vu is the isotropic part of the tensor while the function <p(R) is
bounded and non-vanishing within the considered volume, and vanishes
outside. With these approximations, for Rm » 1 we have the following
asymptotic relations (see Section 9.6):

275

MAGNETIC HELD IN CONDUCTIVE FLUID

/3

An2

,

\

y(R) = ?(R) - - — (In Rm)~2 + . . . ) ,
U
5
'

(34)

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

Z)(R) = ^ ( R ) + i / ? m ' .
Equation (33), supplemented by the condition for the continuity of
E(R) at the boundary and finiteness of £(R) at infinity, represents a
boundary-value problem for the eigenvalues r„ and the eigenfunctions
E„. The smallness of A allows us to apply the WKB approximation.
Consider the simple cases of spherically symmetric, cylindrically
symmetric and flat distributions of the velocity field when the function
<p(R) is defined as

rfR)

[l -R2

,R,<I

to

|R|>1

■•

"

where R is the distance from the origin, the axis, or the symmetry plane,
respectively. Then the lower (i.e., corresponding to small values of n)
eigenvalues, i.e., the growth rates of magnetic energy, are given by
r„ = y(0) - A(6/?;' + 2) l/2 (« + 3/4),
r„ = y(0) - X(6R~l + 2) ,/2 (n + 1/2),

(35)

r„ = y ( 0 ) - - ( 6 / C + 2 ) , / 2 ( « + l / 2 ) ,
where n = 0, 1 , 2 , . . . and y(0) are the homogeneous-flow growth rates
given by (34). The field is self-excited, i.e., the growth rate T„ is positive
when Rm is sufficiently large and X is sufficiently small. In the limit X -*■ 0,
the growth rates Tn tend to y(0). Inhomogeneity leads to the appearance
of the generation threshold in X: for a given Rm the growth rate is positive
when X > X„ with

276

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

4

Xcr = -y(6R~l
3

+ 2)~U2,
(36)

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

A„=2y(6/?; l + 2)- , / 2 ,
Acr = 4y(6/?- | + 2)- , / 2 ,
respectively. We see that for values of Rm close to the generation thres­
hold for homogeneous flows, the resulting values of k„ are indeed small.
The case of planar symmetry turns out to be most favourable for
generation. For large Rm and small X the eigenfunction E0 concentrates
near the maximum of p(R). Note that in the subcritical regimes,
^m < (Rm)cr, the magnetic energy does not decay monotonically. For
sufficiently large magnetic Reynolds numbers, rather prolonged stages of
the temporal growth of the magnetic energy occur (Zeldovich, 1956;
Maslova and Ruzmaikin, 1987).
9.9. MAGNETIC FIELD INTERMnTENCY WITH ACCOUNT OF
THE LORENTZ FORCE
When the magnetic field grows exponentially in a random flow, the
approximation of fixed velocity field (the kinematic dynamo) becomes
inapplicable after a rather short period. The Lorentz force produced by
the magnetic field on the flow becomes essential. Obviously, this backaction leads to considerable effects primarily on the field concentrations
and the Le Chatelier principle suggests that this results in smoothing of
the intermittency. Accounting for this effect makes the picture of
intermittency more realistic; even though magnetic field concentrations
in nature are strong, they never have such catastrophic character as
predicted by the linear model of intermittency. However, one may
wonder whether or not the nonlinearity can remove all the structural
details resulting from random flow at the linear stage.
In this section we make an attempt to describe how the magnetic field
influence on the flow affects the intermittency. To this end, we introduce
into the induction equation the nonlinearity that describes this backaction. Our principal result is the assertion that the steady (limiting)
magnetic field distribution preserves intermittency, i.e., it remains to be

MAGNETIC FIELD IN CONDUCTIVE FLUID

277

structured under certain, not very restrictive, conditions. In a short time
interval, the magnetic field frozen into a fluid particle changes according
to the following law that follows from the induction equation:

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

//,(/ + A0 = fa + ^ t ) HjU), i, j = 1, 2, 3.

(37)

Suppose that the mean velocity vanishes and the velocity field is a
short-correlated, homogeneous and isotropic random process. This is
equivalent to every element of the matrix dvt/dXjAt being a Brownian (or
Wiener) random process with zero average value and certain dispersion
a2, which can be represented as

-

At =

<,[*,,--W„6„),

for an incompressible flow, where M>,7 are independent Wiener processes
with unit dispersion and W// is the trace of the matrix wu.
Equation (37) does account for the back-action of the magnetic field on
the velocity field and diffusion. These effects can be described phenomenologically by adding on the right-hand side of (37) the term — ////,(0
for magnetic diffusion and by multiplying the matrix dvJdXj by a
nonlinear function g(H) for the back-action, so that g -* 0 for H -* oo. A
particular example of a suitable nonlinear function is given by
[1 + (/////.) 2 ]"', where //. is the characteristic field strength above
which nonlinear effects become pronounced. Thus, we consider the
following model of nonlinear evolution of the magnetic field:

H,{t + At) = H,(t) + g{H)ayWij - l- wu<J,,J Hj(t) - rjH,(t).

(38)

In order to derive the equation for the field strength, we raise this
equation to the second power. Taking into account that linear combina­
tions of the type •wijHiHiIH1 are also Wiener processes with zero average
while the products WjjWik after averaging become proportional to At (see

278

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

Section 9.5), we obtain the following equation for the field strength:

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

4
/2\1/2
2 2
dH = - a g Hdt + ( - J ag Hdw, - rjHdt,

(39)

where w, is the Wiener process with zero mean value and unit dispersion.
The field strength H in (3) is a random process. When H is small and
g~ 1, the field grows exponentially (Section 9.5). We expect that the
nonlinearity and diffusion saturate this growth and a certain steady state
distribution is eventually established.
The random process described by (39) can be considered as onedimensional diffusion along the //-axis with diffusivity D = \a2g\H)H2
accompanied by advection along this axis with velocity
V = \a2g2H - t}H + \gg'H2 (cf. Section 8.9). This combined process
corresponds to the following operator:
d1
d
L=D
2r + F — - .
dH
dH

(40)
'

The desired steady-state probability density of the magnetic field p(H) is
the limit for / -» co of the transitional probability density n(/, H, H) for
the transition from the field H to the field H in time t. Notice that the
limiting probability density does not depend on the initial state H. The
transitional probability density obeys the following equation:

an

„ .

— = L(//)n = L\H)U
and the initial condition 11(0, H, H) = S(H — H). The asterisk denotes
the adjoint operator while the second equality is due to the timeindependence of L, i.e., to the symmetry with respect to time inversion,
t-* —t. Passing on to the limit / -* co when dU/dt = 0, we obtain the fol­
lowing equation for the limiting probability density:
L\H)p(H)

= 0.

(41)

MAGNETIC FIELD IN CONDUCTIVE FLUID

279

Of course, the probability density is normalized by / ^ pdH = 1.
Substituting the operator
Lp =

d2
z(Dp)dH2

d
— K(Vp)
dH y'

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

into (41) and solving this equation, we obtain the desired limiting
probability density for the field strength H:
p{H) = C

H2
g(H)

exp
V

(
\

3q C dH \
-\ — 2
.
a2)
Hg {H)l

(42)

One of the integration constants is equated to zero as required by the finiteness of the integral fpdH and the remaining constant C follows from
the normalization condition fpdH = 1.
Thus, for g = [1 + (H/H.)2 ]"' we obtain

The following simple approximate expression can also be used

P(H) = •

This expression as well as similar expressions previously given are valid
for rj/a2 < 1. Otherwise, the distribution (42) cannot be normalized and
the limiting distribution is d(H), i.e., for t -+ oo the field strength tends to
zero.
The form of the limiting distribution (43) suggests that the probability
density is a decreasing function of H for 1 > r\/o2 > 2/3, i.e., typical
limiting strength of the magnetic field is much weaker than //• and the
most probable field strength is zero. For r\/a2 < 2/3, the probability
density grows with H and most probably H ~ //..

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

280

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

The mean energy density of the magnetic field is proportional to
/ H2pdH ~ H2 in both the cases of the previous paragraph. This implies
that for 2/3 <r\la2 < 1, the limiting distribution is intermittent: the
peaks with H ~H., which determine the mean energy, stand against a
weak background of the strength H « //.. A peculiar field distribution
arises for r\la2 < 2/3: the widely scattered regions with weak field in a
rather homogeneously strong field distribution. This can be verified by
calculating the statistical moments (\H\~9) which diverge for certain
q > 0. Of course, such "holes" are present also for larger values of r\/a2
but they are less pronounced because the typical field amplitude is
smaller.
The nonlinear model (38) is only a crude approximation to a consistent
nonlinear problem. In particular, this model does not take into account
that nonlinear effects (magnetic force and associated velocity perturba­
tions and magnetic field influence on magnetic diffusivity) depend not
only on the strength of the magnetic field but also on the field direction.
In addition, replacement of the magnetic diffusion vmAH by friction
— r\H is not a very accurate procedure. An adequate allowance for
magnetic diffusion would probably result in the vanishing of p(H) and its
derivatives for H-* 0. Then for large r\/a2{» 1) the probability density
p(H) would be concentrated at small H, i.e., a typical magnetic field
would be weak. For moderate values of tj/a2 (from 2/3 to 1) the
singularity of p{H) at H = 0 would be smoothed out and the most
probable value of H would be small but finite. For small values of
f//<72(<2/3) p(H) and all its derivatives would vanish for H-+ 0 so that
the mean values (\H\ ~") would be large but finite. In physical terms, these
properties imply that the magnetic fields spread into the holes in the field
distribution diffusionally.
It is, however, remarkable that even the simplest model (38) reflects
some realistic properties of the nonlinear dynamo.
Indeed, the parameter rj/a2 can be understood as an inverse magnetic
Reynolds number for a certain scale of field concentration. Obviously,
the magnetic Reynolds number is of the order of unity for the scales near
dissipation. Therefore, this result can be interpreted as an indication of
the magnetic field intermittency at small scales. On the other hand, we
can also understand this result as an indication of intermittency for the
moderate magnetic Reynolds numbers which are characteristic, e.g., of

MAGNETIC HELD IN CONDUCTIVE FLUID

281

the threshold for field self-excitation; this situation is analogous to the
hydrodynamic transition from laminar to turbulent flow, during which
flow structures arise.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

9.10. THE DYNAMO THEOREM
The picture of evolution of the magnetic field in a short-correlated flow
of a conducting medium outlined above is prescribed for other types of
stochasticflowswith finite memory time. For instance, in aflowwith loss
of memory of fixed moments T, 2T, 3T, . . . (the renovating flow) a typical
realization of the magnetic field grows exponentially while the mean
values of the consequent power of the magnetic field strength have
progressively increasing growth rates, so that intermittent field distribu­
tions are established. This statement is the main content of the dynamo
theorem of Molchanov et al. (1984). However, the finite renovation time
evaluation of the growth rate is complicated by the difficulties in
calculating the magnetic field increments for the finite time increment of
the order T. These increments are determined by the evolutionary
Green's matrix, so that the field values at the moments m and (« + 1)T
are related by
//,[(«+ l)r] = (V/,(«r)
along the Lagrangian path. The evolution of the field after many
renovation cycles is described by the product of the corresponding
Green's matrices Gjj, which are all independent because the flow is
renovating. The problem of evaluating the product of a large number of
independent random matrices was first solved by Furstenberg (1963).
The mathematical formalism used in proving the dynamo theorem is
rather complicated. Here we restrict ourselves to a discussion of the
result while the detailed presentation is given by Molchanov et al. (1984,
1985).
At first sight, symmetry properties suggest that the product of the
independent random matrices must tend, in the isotropic case, to the unit
matrix multiplied by the mean value of the determinants of the
multipliers. Actually, a more delicate phenomenon occurs: a spontaneous
violation of symmetry owing to which a certain random set of basis

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

282

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

vectors is singled out that determines the directions of the magnetic
vector fields which either grow or decay without strong change of their
directions. In order to determine how a given magnetic field vector
would evolve, it is sufficient to decompose it into three components
directed along the random basis vectors. These components change at
different rates so that eventually the total field vector approaches in the
direction of that basis vector along which the field grows most rapidly
(apart from the degenerate case where the initial field is orthogonal to
this direction). The randomness of this set of basis vectors means that
this set is formed during the evolution of the magnetic field and one can
determine in advance only the correlation properties of the basis vectors.
In contrast, the growth rates of the magnetic field components directed
along the basis vectors are deterministic and they can be determined in
advance. The concept of spontaneous violation of the symmetry of the
products of random matrices can be traced back to the ideas of Lyapunov
whose name is immortalized in Lyapunov's exponents (which are
essentially the growth rates of the field components) and Lyapunov's
random basis. To some extent, other ideas of the intermittency theory
also date back to Lyapunov (in particular, this is the idea of difference
between growth rates of consequent statistical moments). Unfortunately,
the development of these ideas experienced a lull that lasted for more
than half a century after the tragic death of Lyapunov during the revolt in
Odessa in 1919. Remaining alive in the mathematical consciousness,
these ideas were rediscovered only later.
In order to understand the result of consecutive actions of a large
number of independent random matrices on a given vector H 0 qualita­
tively, imagine a two-dimensional sphere whose radius is equal to the
length of this vector. Under the action of a single matrix G, with unit
determinant, the sphere is transformed into an ellipsoid of the same
volume. Let the extension factor along the x-axis be X. Then the
conservation of the volume (or area in two dimensions) requires that
along the y-axis contraction occurs by a factor X~l. After this trans­
formation, the vector length becomes
(A2//,2, + HSyX'2)1'2 = H0(X2sin2<p + X~2 cos>) , / 2 ,
where <p is the polar angle. When cos q> > (1 + X2) ~'a, this length exceeds

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

MAGNETIC FIELD IN CONDUCTIVE FLUID

283

the initial one, H0 = (H$x + Hly)ul. This shows that the set of directions
q>, for which H 0 is stretched to become larger, is more than half of all pos­
sible directions. In other words, an arbitrary vector is stretched with a
probability exceeding 1/2. Therefore, the action of the large number of
matrices G with independent directions of stretchings and independent
stretching coefficients leads to net growth of the vector length.
The unit determinant of the matrices G corresponds to the incompressibility of the fluid in which the magnetic field is embedded. It is not dif­
ficult to take into account the difference of the determinants from unity
because the determinants of the multiplier matrices, which are simply
scalar factors, commute with all the matrices and can be multiplied
separately.
Hence, practically any magnetic field vector eventually approaches in
the direction leading to the vector of the Lyapunov basis and its growth
rate becomes
Vll) = -\ng,
x
where g = (| GH0|/|//0|) is the mean magnitude of the stretching by a single
matrix, and T is the renovation time. Those degenerate vectors which are
orthogonal to one or even two of the vectors of Lyapunov's basis evolve
at smaller rates ym and y°\ Due to the fact that the determinants of the
matrices G are unity, these growth rates are related by
yd) +

j,<2) +

yO) = Q

Common sense suggests that this relation implies, e.g., y(l) > 0 and y0) < 0
because it is hardly probable that three more or less arbitrary numbers
vanish simultaneously. Nevertheless, this conjecture, which singles out
possible degenerate situations when all the three Lyapunov exponents
vanish, is very difficult to prove rigorously. It is a curious oddity that one
first shows the presence of intermittency, i.e., difference of growth rates
of different moments, and only then the positiveness of one of the
Lyapunov exponents, e.g., / " , follows.
From the standpoint of the probability theory, intermittency appears
as a consequence of the so-called Lyapunov inequality for statistical

284

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

moments, which states that for every random quantity the following
inequality holds:

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

<£'+'>*«;'XOIn turn, this inequality is similar to the well known inequality relation
between the arithmetic average value and the geometric average value.
However, this approach only proves the presence of intermittency,
leaving out the obscure specific processes of evolution of magnetic lines
which lead to the intermittency. This latter question was addressed by
Finn and Ott (1988) who were involved in the mapping theory which is
widely used in the studies of chaos in dynamic systems. In the framework

Fig. 9.8. The "figure-eight" rope dynamo in terms of mappings.

MAGNETIC FIELD IN CONDUCTIVE FLUID

283

of this formalism, we replace a detailed flow in the "figure-eight"
dynamo of Fig. 9.2 by the following discrete mapping (Fig. 9.8). Consider
the magnetic loop initially situated on the plane (x, y) and deformed
according to the law:
_ f «*«
yn < a,
Vpxn + a y„>a,
(44)

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

" +l

liy. + ctVft

yn>a,

»"

Fig. 9.9. The "figure-eight" dynamo can be also realized as a series of continuous
deformations.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

286

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

where x and y are coordinates of the points of the loop and n is the map­
ping cycle number. It can be easily verified that this type of deformation
leads to the same final configuration as the sequence of continuous
deformations shown in Fig. 9.9. The mapping (44) occurs on twodimensional manifold and is discontinuous; however, it leads to the same
result as continuous three-dimensional transformation which can hardly
be described analytically.
The mapping (44) can be analyzed with the help of the standard
methods of the mapping theory. It turns out that the field strength in the
magnetic loop transformed by this mapping becomes intensified and the
corresponding phase-space trajectory approaches a strange attractor
whose dimension is fractional and smaller than the dimension of the
phase space. This implies that the growing magnetic field occupies a
small fraction of the physical volume. This distribution can be naturally
identified with the intermittent peaks of the magnetic field. A more
realistic description of intermittency requires the introduction of more
complicated dynamic systems. We emphasize that the particular form of
mapping (44) is not important for the presence of intermittency, and
determines only the attractor dimension and the rate of approach to the
attractor. Finn and Ott (1988) also considered other relevant mappings.

CHAPTER

TEN

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

THE CASUAL UNIVERSE

The role of chance and the formation of structures associated with
randomness manifest themselves in very diverse physical processes in
our universe. Recent developments have put forward the possibility of a
very basic role of chance in the universe: the universe itself can be a result
of casualness. To some extent, these notions remind us of the ideas of
L. Boltzmann who considered the surrounding world an enormous
fluctuation. This chapter discusses the most universal role of chance
following a review of Zeldovich (1988).
10.1. THE UNIVERSE
The size of the universe, and even the size of the explored part of the uni­
verse, to be more moderate and exact, by far exceeds the possibilities of
human imagination.
In ancient times, people could hardly agree that the Earth is a sphere.
Nowadays, when airplanes cover thousands of kilometers without
landing, in the age of spaceflights, radio and television (and, unfor­
tunately, in the age of inter-continental missiles with nuclear warheads)
the Earth has become a small fragile ball. Now, nobody is much
impressed by the distance of the Earth from the Sun, which is 150 million
kilometers, the so-called astronomical unit. However, the distance of the
solar system to the center of the Galaxy (about 10 kiloparsecs = 3 X 1022 cm) exceeds the distance between the Earth and the
Sun by a factor of two billion. Furthermore, the greatest distance at which
the brightest galaxies are observable is of the order of a few thousand megaparsecs, larger by a factor of a million than the distance from the
287

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

288

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

Sun to the Galactic centre. This distance is greater than the astronomical
unit by the same factor as the astronomical unit exceeds a small dust par­
ticle, whose size is far below one millimeter.
Equally impressive is the mass of the universe. The Earth's mass is
about 6 X 1027g. The Sun's mass, 2 X 10"g, is 300 thousand times
greater. The mass of the Galaxy equals about 2 X 10" solar masses. The
observable part of the universe has a total mass crudely estimated as 1055
solar masses.
These scales cannot leave a man who tries to perceive and conceive
these enormous scales and masses revealed by modern telescopes
indifferent. These figures stagger the imagination and astronomers
probably struggle constantly with dizziness. The immediate, natural
reaction to this shock is aversion to the theory of the expanding universe.
Can it be true that all the magnificence and enormousness of the universe
were formerly stuck in a sphere of a few centimeters radius? And still
more absurd is the question: is it possible that everything existing,
everything observed could be formed "from nothing"?
Here we consciously restrict ourselves to a narrow statement of the
problem. We only discuss, whether or not the assumption of the
formation of the universe "from nothing" contradicts any of the firmly
established general laws of nature. The point is that the most general
"conservation law" is formulated as "from nothing, one can get only
nothing". This "law" is naive and unscientific. The conservation laws are
always concrete: e.g., the energy is conserved, or the electric charge is
conserved. We will check whether or not these concrete physical laws are
satisfied in the casual universe and discuss the existence of similar, more
or less firmly established, physical conservation laws.
Imagine the following situation: you are visited by an inventor of some
very remarkable and unusual engine or electric generator. The first
reasonable step of an expert is to check whether or not you have
encountered a new design of perpetuum mobile. It has become a custom
to reject such designs without detailed analysis. The perpetuum mobile
violates the energy conservation law, and therefore there is an inevitable
mistake in the arguments of its inventor. The search for a particular
mistake in a given scheme is of interest only to the inventor himself.
Let us apply this approach to the discussion of the formation of the
universe "from nothing". Does this hypothesis contradict the laws of

THE CASUAL UNIVERSE

289

physics? Is it possible, now or in the future, to formulate a consistent,
correct theory of this grandiose event?

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

10.2. CONSERVATION OF CHARGES
Let us begin with the conservation law for the electric charge. With this
law, the answer is simple and obvious: this law does not prohibit the for­
mation of an electrically neutral universe, i.e., the universe containing
equal numbers of positive and negative charges. There exists strong
evidence that this is what our universe is. Otherwise, strong electric fields
would arise that would destroy the homogeneity and isotropy of the
universe. Thus, the universe is probably exactly neutral and, therefore,
could be formed "from nothing" without violating the conservation of
electric charge.
Consider now the conservation of the baryonic charge. Recall that all
known processes occurring in the laboratories conserve the total number
of protons and neutrons. In particular, nuclear radioactivity is mani­
fested either by the regrouping of protons and neutrons or by the
transformation of protons into neutrons and vice versa.
When y-rays (i.e., photons) are emitted, such regrouping occurs with
the transition of the nucleus from a state with increased energy to the
basic state or a state with a lower excitation energy. In a-decay, most of
the protons and neutrons of the parent nucleus remain in the nucleus
while some leave the nucleus combined into He nuclei (two protons plus
two neutrons). During a /?-decay, a fast electron (/?-particle) and neutrino
are produced in the transformation of a neutron into a proton. The
reverse process also occurs when positrons are produced in the transfor­
mation of a proton into a neutron (p -* N + e+ + ve), but this process is
possible only when the proton is within a nucleus and the resulting
neutron occupies a lower energy state.
A free proton has a smaller mass than a free neutron, therefore, the free
neutron is /^-radioactive; a free proton is stable and its instability
develops only within some nuclei.
This is how the conservation law of the baryonic charge was formula­
ted at the end of the 1940's: the total number of protons and neutrons is
invariant. This was then followed by the discovery of the so-called
strange particles. Initially, they were discovered in cosmic rays and later

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

290

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

thoroughly studied in accelerators. These particles are unstable. They are
produced from protons and neutrons and decay into protons and
neutrons. For example, p + N = -*■ A + K+ + N (A is the strange
hyperon and K is the strange meson). These particles are called strange
because notwithstanding the comparatively large probability of their
production during a very short collision time, they have a rather long life­
time of 10 - 8 to l(T , 0 s.
In the early 1950's, the so-called baryon resonances were discovered.
The energy dependence of the scattering of re-mesons on protons and
neutrons indicates that the latter two particles first combine into a single
particle which decays a little bit later. Thus, for instance,
p + n+^A++

-~p + 7i+,
-*p + n~,

p+

n-^A°

After the discovery of these processes the baryon conservation law
has acquired a more complicated form: what is conserved is the sum B =
p + A r + A + Z + . . . + A + + + A + + A 0 + A - - l - . . . = const., or the
total number of baryons.
In 1955, the long-expected experimental discovery of antiprotons
occurred. The existence of antiparticles (antibaryons) was predicted
shortly after the prediction and detection of antielectrons, i.e., positrons.
However, the energy required for production of the pair p + p is 2000
times the energy required for the pair e~ + e+. This explains why these
two detections were separated by a quarter century. At that time the
nerves of some scientists cracked and the very existence of antibaryons
was argued against. Now there is no place for such doubts!
Thus, the final form of the baryonic charge conservation law reads
B = p + N+A + ... + A++ +
...-p-N~A-...-X++-...=
const., i.e, the difference between the total numbers of baryons and
antibaryons is invariant.
In the past 20 years, it was shown that a baryon consists of three
quarks. The antibaryons consist of antiquarks. Correspondingly, the

THE CASUAL UNIVERSE

291

baryonic charge and its conservation law can be formulated in terms of
quarks as

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

35 =

ZJ <*>:~ X ** = COnSt ->

where qt is the number of quarks of the /-th type; qk is the number of antiquarks of the k-\h type; the sum is over all types of quarks.
The law of conservation of baryonic charge is of paramount impor­
tance both for the universe as a whole and for our immediate surround­
ings. This law dictates that a given number of baryons can be used for
energy production only by means of their transformation into the lowestenergy state, namely, the iron nuclei whose binding energy is maximal.
Thus, the energy can be produced either by transformation of uranium
into the elements from the middle of Mendeleev's table or by transforma­
tion of hydrogen into iron.
The former process is successfully realized at nuclear power plants.
The latter proceeds within stars. In a modified form (beginning not from
the start and ending before the end), the latter process is realized in the
fusion of the nuclei of deuterium and tritium with the production of
4
He and a neutron. In the future, this process will be the source of
thermonuclear energy on Earth. The common property of both these
processes is the release of only a small fraction, i.e., less than 1 percent, of
the total energy stored in the fuel.
According to Einstein's equivalence law, E = Mc2, the total energy
stored in 1 g of matter is 9 X 1013 joules.
The abolition of the baryonic charge conservation law would imply the
principal possibility of direct decay of the proton: p = e+ + energy or
p + e~ = energy.
Then protons, either free or bounded in nuclei, could be unstable and
decay releasing enormous energy, provided that the baryonic charge
conservation law was not true. The utter importance of this conservation
law is obvious.
The baryonic charge of "nothing" is evidently zero. Since baryonic
charge is conserved, the universe formed "from nothing" must have

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

292

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

vanishing net baryonic charge, i.e., equal amounts of matter and
antimatter. This is what was thought in the 1960's by those who first pro­
posed the idea of the birth of the universe. They believed that the
universe was born with equal numbers of baryons and antibaryons.
However, if matter and antimatter in equal quantities were uniformly
distributed in space (i.e., their densities were equal at every position),
they would be annihilated completely when the temperature became
cooler. There is no mechanism for their separation because gravity acts
identically on both the matter and the antimatter.
The birth of the universe in the form we are observing is possible only
in the case of the baryonic charge conservation law being violated.
Avoiding a discussion of the fascinating but complicated development of
the problem, we outline here the results.
The electric charge must be conserved because this is dictated by the
Maxwell equations. In other words, the connection between electric
charges and electromagnetic field automatically results in the conserva­
tion of the electric charge.
However, there is no field which would play an analogous role in
ensuring the conservation of the baryonic charge. The belief in the
conservation of the baryonic charge was based solely on experiment. Any
experiment necessarily has restricted accuracy. Extrapolating experimen­
tal results, physicists, before the 1960's, tacitly assumed that strongly
different numbers could appear in the world of elementary particles.
When a neutron decays into a proton (/?-decay), the average decay time
is about 1000 s. It would seem that nature must choose between two
extremes: either a relatively fast decay of the type of the /?-decay of
neutrons, or no decay at all, as in the case of the absolutely stable
electron. The third intermediate possibility of slow decay seemed
inelegant and very improbable until the mid-sixties.
Later, tastes changed and the number of people who base their action
on the presumption that everything that is not forbidden is allowed grew.
Now it is admitted that the proton also can possibly decay. However, the
situation remains dramatic: experimental results have shifted the lower
limit of the proton decay time to 1032 years and the decay still has not
been detected.
The belief in the non-conservation of baryonic charge is now based on
the fact that the universe contains matter and is practically free of

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

THE CASUAL UNIVERSE

293

antimatter. These arguments also invoke differences in the properties of
particles and antiparticles and violation of thermodynamic equilibrium
due to the expansion of the universe (this was first noted by A.D.
Sakharov in 1967). The corresponding estimates show that the total
number of protons and neutrons is a billion times smaller than the
number of photons and neutrinos. But what is most important is the
understanding that emerged of the difference between the electric and the
baryonic charges. In addition, the physics community (or, at least, the
theoretical physicists) have got rid of the fear of large numbers. If the life­
time of the proton is as long as 1040 years, this would probably make pro­
ton decay detection impossible in direct experiments for many years to
come. At present, it is unclear which indirect experiments would help to
solve this problem.
This situation is highly appreciated by astronomers because these are
astronomical observations which would lead to further progress in
physics, as did the measurements of the speed of light and the
verification of Newton's law of gravitation.
The existence of a universe filled with matter is as yet simple, but it is
an important proof of the non-conservation of the baryonic charge!
10.3. CONSERVATION OF ENERGY
Consider now the conservation of energy in the universe as a whole.
Recall that the energy of a particle at rest is equivalent to its mass,
E = Mc2. The conservation of the rest energy is essentially the conserva­
tion of the mass.
J. Dalton and W. Praut were the ones who noticed that the atomic
weights of many elements are integers. This observation has naturally led
to the hypothesis that all nuclei are formed from identical elementary
bricks. The fact that the electric charges of the nuclei are not proportional
to their weight implies that there exist two modifications of such bricks,
protons and neutrons, which differ in their charges but have nearly equal
masses. Here we somewhat deviate from the description of the historical
development, having omitted the dismal period when the nuclei were
believed to be formed from protons and electrons. Roughly speaking, due
to the uncertainty principle, electrons cannot fit into the small nuclei.
The first correct ideas of the existence of neutrons were proposed as a

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

294

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

hypothesis in the early 1920's. Rigorous proofs of their existence came in
the 1930's and in 1945 the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombings occurred.
In this very brief account of the historical development, we have not
mentioned the discovery of isotopes and the very accurate determination
of atomic weights of individual isotopes.
As a result, on the one hand, the theory of the universal composition of
nuclei by protons and neutrons has been substantiated; on the other
hand, the first argument in favour of this theory — the integer atomic
weights of isotopes — turned out to be inaccurate. This is the irony of the
development of science. However, the not exactly integer atomic weights
of isotopes have acquired another, no less important, significance.
From the fact that the mass of helium atom is 0.6 percent smaller than
the combined mass of four atoms of hydrogen, astrophysicists have
deduced that in the interiors of stars, hydrogen transforms into helium
releasing 0.6 percent of its mass (0.006 X c 2 = 5.4 X 1018 erg g_1) in the
form of radiation. We should specially emphasize that this conclusion
was reached long before the development of nuclear physics suggested
specific ways of this transformation.
We have made this excursion to nuclear physics in order to elucidate
that, somehow, released gravitational energy also results in a decrease of
mass of the whole in comparison with the sum of masses of the parts. The
mass of a neutron star is around 10-15 percent smaller than the total
mass of its particles. This difference of masses fuels the supernova
explosions that accompany the formation of neutron stars, even though a
very large fraction of this energy is carried away by the neutrinos.
Is the mass fraction that can be converted into energy by gravitation
limited? As early as 1962, one of the authors showed that such limit does
not exist (Zeldovich, 1962). Massive bodies, whose mass exceed 2-3 solar
masses, reach the high-density state in the course of their natural
evolution. Low-mass bodies can reach high densities only after overcom­
ing a very high barrier. A weight of iron of mass 1 kg is practically stable;
it is curious that having spent the energy E to compress it, one can release
the energy E + 999 g c 2 in the course of subsequent spontaneous
collapse, i.e., transform 999 grams of mass into energy. After the collapse,
the mass of the weight would decrease to 1 g and its final size would be in­
conceivably small, of the order 10~28cm. This small fact is associated
with very sad memories: it was the last piece of discussion

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

THE CASUAL UNIVERSE

295

between one of the authors (Ya.B.Z.) and his teacher, L.D. Landau, a few
days before the tragic accident.
In their remarkable book on field theory, L.D. Landau and E.M.
Lifshitz gave an exact and rigorous proof of the fact that the mass (and,
consequently, the energy) of a closed world is identically zero. The
discussion above allows us to understand this statement intuitively. The
negative energy of the gravitational interaction between the parts exactly
compensates for the positive energy of the whole of all the matter present.
The general relativity theory establishes a connection between gravita­
tion and geometry. This proves that exact compensation occurs if the
space that contains matter is closed.
Thus, the general relativity theory removes the last obstacle for the
formation of the universe "from nothing". The energy of "nothing" is
zero. But the energy of a closed universe is also zero. Therefore, the
energy conservation law does not preclude the formation of a closed
universe "from nothing" (it is important that what is allowed is a
geometrically closed universe but not an open infinite universe).
10.4. THE ASTROPHYSICAL CONSEQUENCES.
IS THE PULSATING UNIVERSE INEVITABLE?
The first consequence is that the total density of all forms of matter must
be sufficiently high; this lends additional support to the existence, in
some form, of the "hidden mass" because the density of the ordinary and
well known forms of mass (protons, nuclei, electrons, photons) is
insufficient.
The second consequence is that the expansion of the universe as
observed now should be replaced in future by contraction. This contrac­
tion will occur earlier or, more probably, later even in comparison with
the present age of the universe."
The idea of a closed world, which first expands and then contracts, has

* However, note another variant of the cosmological theory (see Zeldovich, 1984): there is a
possibility that the cosmological constant is non-vanishing and has such a sign that it
replaces a part of the mass. Then the expansion proceeds indefinitely - the world is not
"closed" along the time axis (there was the time of birth but general collapse will never
occur) even though it is closed spatially.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

296

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

led to the hypothesis of a pulsating endless universe. One small thing is
lacking in both literal and figurative senses: we understand how
expansion stops and is replaced by contraction at the large (maximal)
radius of the universe; what remains to be understood is how the
transition from contraction to expansion at the small (minimal) radius
occurs. The idea of the universe being infinite in time (to the past!)
became more popular when it was realized that when allowance was
made for vacuum polarization by spatial curvature (strong gravitational
field) or by the gravitational field produced by the scalar field with non­
zero mass, the equations of general relativity indeed possess formally
rigorous inflationary solutions of the type
a{t) = —
cosh (H0t) = (e'"^ + e+Ho,)/2H0,
H
o
for the radius of the universe, with the minimal radius //0~' of the order
1CT28 cm (here H0 is the Hubble constant for this early epoch). Formally,
these solutions are also present in the classical theory. Which objections
can be brought forward against these solutions?
We consider the possibility of the formation of the universe "from
nothing" as the most important objection. The idea of an endless
universe seemed to be inevitable (and only the way of transition from
contraction to expansion, in particular, whether it is classical or
quantum, was debated) until we came to believe that the energy and the
baryonic charge were forever given as conserved and non-vanishing
quantities. Now, we have got rid of the charms of these ideas. Having
agreed that the hypothesis of the endless universe is not inevitable, we
can turn to a discussion of the details of the theory of cyclic evolution.
As early as in the 1930's, a serious thermodynamic argument was put
forward against the idea of an everlasting, cyclically reproduced universe.
Entropy grows during every cycle.b As a result, the amplitude of
pulsations grew from one cycle to the subsequent one. Applying this
b

There exists the viewpoint that entropy growth is replaced by its decrease when expansion
is replaced by contraction. In this connection, a mysterious reversal of the "time arrow" is
mentioned. We note that the influence of the overall slow expansion or contraction on
specific processes involving elementary particles or stellar interiors seems to be
unphysical and groundless.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

THE CASUAL UNIVERSE

297

result to the past, we see that the total number of cycles, beginning with
the first one with zero entropy, is finite. Thus, a cyclically evolving
universe nevertheless has a finite age, i.e., it should be somehow born.
Recently Belinsky el al. (1985) have considered the expansion and
contraction of the universe filled by a massive coherent scalar field.
Similar calculations have been carried out even earlier but, perhaps, with
less definite conclusions. The relation between pressure and energy
density depends on whether the scalar field (p is almost steady (mtp2 »
fift), or rapidly changing and not massive {h2q>2» m2^). In the former
case, p = — e, and gravitational repulsion occurs while in the latter case
the pressure is maximal,/? = +e, and the gravitational force is attractive.
In principle, both these situations can have a place in both contraction
and expansion. However, during the contraction stage, the latter regime,
p = +e, is stable and the field pressure opposes contraction. In this case
the classical solution predicts singularity and the radius of the universe
vanishes. Solutions with a smooth transition from contraction to
expansion turn out to be exceptional and improbable. However, what is
more important is not the detailed analysis of the solutions but rather the
analysis of the assumptions adopted in the course of the solution of the
problem.
We consider an exactly homogeneous scalar field and an exactly
homogeneous and isotropic universe. Homogeneity implies uniformity,
i.e., equivalence of all spatial positions at any given moment. Isotropy
implies the equivalence of all spatial directions.
When we consider expansion, these presumptions are reasonable:
those regions where the scalar field is maximal rapidly expand. The
classical scalar field becomes practically uniform while all the other fields
(in particular, the electromagnetic field which violates isotropy) rapidly
become weaker.
However, in the course of contraction, one can expect strong instabi­
lity, violation of homogeneity and isotropy. Allowance for perturbations
thus makes the possibility of smooth passing of the universe through
some finite minimal radius even less probable. In essence, this argument
is close to the notion of growing entropy. Hence, even if these arguments
cannot be considered as a rigorous theorem, we have enough reasons to
turn our minds to the spontaneous formation of the universe which
removes the necessity of a cyclic universe.

298

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

10.5. THE SPONTANEOUS FORMATION
Above we have pondered over the principal possibility of the birth of the
universe. What can be said about the specific mechanism of this
phenomenon? Here we can only formulate the problem.
First of all, the words "nothing" and "from nothing" can be under­
stood in various ways. One can think of empty, flat Minkowsky space —
the general relativity equations have such solutions and it is not restricted
in time. The birth of the universe can be envisaged as a cartoon shown in
Fig. 10.1. The reader should keep in mind that what is shown is the onedimensional analogue. We cannot sketch the birth of a three-dimensional
closed space from (three-dimensional cross-section of) the Minkowsky
space. The parts I-IV of the figure differ in the corresponding time t.
After splitting out of a closed region, the remaining space restores its
flatness. However, this space is flat only in the classical limit. Actually,
the quantum theory predicts fluctuations of the space-time metric just as
an oscillator has finite and equal averaged kinetic and potential energies
mv2/2 = u ^ 0 in the lowest-energy state.
Thus, we are talking about a fluctuation, but such a strong fluctuation
that the very topology changes and the space splits into two parts. At pre­
sent, we cannot analyze such fluctuations formally. Recall that now we
can deduce the properties of a vacuum (its average energy, i.e., the
cosmological constant) only from experiments.

!li

IV

o
Fig. 10.1. The birth of the closed universe (a ball in the lowest panel IV) from flat
Minkowsky space (A/ at the stage I). At intermediate stages, the metric remains flat
(Minkowskian) far from thefluctuationwhich gives birth (splitting out) to the ball.

THE CASUAL UNIVERSE

299

oO
t-o

t-t,

t-t 2

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

Fig. 10.2. Spontaneous formation of the universe "from nothing". Before the moment
t = 0, the metric (and time, in particular) did not exist.

Another popular possibility considers a sole closed world (without the
background of the parent Minkowsky space) (see Fig. 10.2). In this case
nothing exists before the "beginning", no metric and, in particular, no
time.
The classical equations of motion do not possess such relevant
solutions. One should consider quantum solutions. This problem bears
some similarity to the problem of a-decay of the uranium or radium
nucleus. According to classical mechanics, a-particles cannot traverse all
the distance from the parent nucleus to infinity. The solutions in
quantum mechanics for a-particles are able to describe both regions: the
"under-barrier", in which kinetic energy is negative (i.e., classical motion
is impossible) and the far region where both solutions, classical and
quantum, exist and differ only slightly.
The quantum-mechanical theory of the birth of the universe is
formulated similarly to the theory of a-decay. Quite naturally, this
problem is solved in a very crude approximation taking into account only
two quantities, the radius of the closed universe a{t) and the scalarfieldg>.
In quantum theory, one introduces the corresponding momenta Pa
and P9 and constructs the wave function \f/(a, <p). The momentum
Pa = Mc(td = f(a)d is proportional to the expansion rate and the classical
limit allows us to evaluate a = da/dt and, hence, the time,
t = f(da/dtyl da.
Note also that the quantum theory gives, even in its present under­
developed form, arguments in favour of a closed universe (in contrast to
an infinite flat or open universe). Only for a closed universe can one in­
troduce a certain finite-value effective mass MeS. Whatever formulation
of quantum mechanics we adopt (wave functions, or "path integration",

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

300

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

or whatever else) the probability of spontaneous birth of an infinite
universe is identical to zero.0
However, the interpretation of these results remains, in general,
unclear. Arguments of quantum mechanics indicate the possibility of the
origin of the universe. The results that consider the probability of this or
that value of the scalar field ip in the newborn universe are also
interesting. However, the modulus of the wave function and the
probability are difficult to interpret when we discuss the origin of a
unique object, our universe. There are also more fundamental reasons for
a sceptical attitude to concrete theories about the formation of the
universe "from nothing".
The point is that the development of fundamental physics is still far
from its end! Moreover, recently we see a revival of theories of
elementary particles relying more on geometry. On the other hand, these
are the theories which unify the bosons and the fermions and also unify
the internal variables of particles and fields with the coordinates and the
Lorentz transformations. In perspective, these theories should give a
direct proof of the existence of the scalar fields and determine their
properties. Sooner or later, the theory of the masses of particles will be
formulated and physicists will tell us what the hidden mass discovered by
astronomers is. Even closer to the problem of the origin of the universe
are hypotheses of high-dimensional space-time. The idea that there is one
"excessive" coordinate x» coiled into a ring of length / = 2nR, where R is
the ring radius, was proposed as early as in the 1920's.d This situation is
schematically shown in Fig. 10.3 where three spatial coordinates are
replaced by a single one, x, directed along the tube.
c

Zeldovich and Starobinsky (1984) have considered a flat universe which is finite as a
torus by identifying the opposite sides of a cube. However, this leads to the loss of exact
isotropy of space: the directions parallel to the cube diagonals are not equivalent to those
orthogonal to the sides or edges. However, this hypothesis as yet cannot be ruled out. The
possibilities of observational verification of such hypotheses are discussed by Sokoloff
and Shvartsman (1974).

d

Such closure, which restricts the interval of variation of the coordinate x4 by a small value
l(xA + / » x4), is what mathematicians call compactification. We denote this coordinate
xt, bearing in mind that time is usually denoted by x0 and spatial coordinates X\, x2, x3.
The resulting space-time isfive-dimensional.This theory was proposed by T. Kaluza and
O. Klein in the 1920's (see Kaluza, 1921).

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

THE CASUAL UNIVERSE

301

Fig. 10.3. Schematic view of the Kaluza-KJein space. Shown is the cross-section for a
certain given moment, XQ = const. The three spatial coordinates Xi, x% and JC} are replaced
in this figure by a single one, x. The resulting configuration has the form of a twodimensional surface of a tube with coordinates x and xA measured along its surface.

In quantum theory, the motion of a particle along the closed coordin­
ate x4, or particle localization at coordinate x 4 , requires the particle to
have enormous energy. Thus, even in experiments involving enormous
energies of 1017 or even 10l9GeV (compare with 103GeV at the
accelerators of the 1980's), motion along the distinguished coordinate xA
cannot be detected (or along the coordinates from x4 through x9).
Theorists say that in the low-energy limit, space-time remains effectively
four-dimensional. If, in addition, we restrict ourselves to scales which are
small in comparison with astronomical ones, space-time can be described
by the good old metric of Minkowski.
Nevertheless, the introduction of additional dimensions, x4 in the
simplest example, does not occur without any consequence. One can
envisage weak variations of the metric for which the additional coordin­
ate axis is presumed to be non-orthogonal to the basic (macroscopic)
axes. This presumption turns out to be equivalent to introduction of the
electromagnetic field in ordinary space.
The introduction of more compactined ("closed") variables of up to 6
or 7 (transition to 10-dimensional space-time) allows us to introduce not
only the electromagnetic field but also those fields (W±,Z0) which
describe weak interaction as well as gluon fields responsible for strong in­
teraction. In addition, the theory of supersymmetry which unifies boson
fields (in particular, the electromagnetic field) and fermion fields (in
particular, the electron-positron field), is also "geometrical". It intro­
duces unusual variables but they are geometrical. Einstein's dream of

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

302

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

geometrization of the whole of physics is much more realistic today than
it seemed five or ten years before.
We at last show a formulation of theories in which the scalar fields
become the inevitable consequence. The significance of the scalar fields
was mentioned above — without them, the inflationary universe would
be impossible. Vacuum polarization as a source of energy and negative
pressure for inflation of the universe are a particular case of the scalar
field.
However, what is more important and specific is the other aspect of the
influence on cosmology of the theories with "excessive" dimensions. At
the moment of birth of the closed world, the spatial variables Xi, x2 and x3
vary within a very narrow range of the order of 2na(t), where a(t) -*■ 0 for
t > 0. It is natural then to presume in this case that the universe is actually
born symmetric over all the spatial variables (of dimension 5 or more).
The separation of geometrical variables into "internal", or compactified,
variables and the usual three geometric variables occurs only later. This
separation is actually a typical spontaneous violation of symmetry!
Initially we have, for instance, a 9-dimensional sphere in which all
directions are equivalent, and later six dimensions from aA through a9
become frozen (their characteristic scales remain of the order 1(T33 cm)
while the remaining three dimensions grow exponentially and eventually
exceed 5000 Mpc = 1028 cm, i.e., they become larger than the observable
part of the universe.
Our intention remains the same as before. We wish to describe the
formation of the universe "from nothing". However, the concrete
realization of this intention becomes drastically different from the initial
variants.
Thus, further progress in cosmology requires a fundamental develop­
ment of the physics of the micro-world. Not only the grand unification of
various interactions but also the super grand unification of the microworld and cosmology present the most fundamental and ambitious
programme of the final decades of the twentieth century.

EPILOGUE

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

THE BIRTH OF "DIVINAMICS"

Until recently, chance was not very influential in physical theories.
Theorists prefered deterministic theories. Such classical giants as me­
chanics, relativity theory and electrodynamics do not deal with random­
ness. The laws of chance were invoked only for the description of
enormous particle ensembles in statistical physics.
Randomness is an integral part of quantum mechanics but the
Schrodinger equation for the basic quantity or the wave function is
strictly deterministic. Only the evaluation of the observable quantities
relies on probability theory.
In fact, the generality of the deterministic approach is only an illusion.
Only in special cases are solutions totally deterministic and predictable.
Actually, even the trajectories of relatively simple mechanical systems
cannot be predicted.
Of course, if Laplace's demon could determine exactly the coordinates
and velocities of all the particles at some initial moment, the future
would become absolutely predictable. However, when two infinitesimally close trajectories diverge exponentially, any uncertainty in the
initial conditions rapidly grows and the prediction for sufficiently long
periods becomes impossible. It is clear that the initial conditions cannot
be determined exactly because experimental errors are unavoidable. But
it is not always appreciated (at least, it was not realized during the times
of Laplace) that this cannot be done even in principle. The problem is as­
sociated with the difficulties of formulating the very concept of very large
and very small numbers.
In order to define a number, for instance, through n figures of a binary
sequence, n bits of information are required. Only some numbers, e.g.,
303

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

304

THE ALMIGHTY CHANCE

periodic fractions, can be described with less information. Therefore,
using only the rules (algorithms) of finite complexity, one can represent
only a relatively small set of numbers. In particular, the exact evaluation
of almost every real number requires an algorithm of infinite length. It is
interesting that the number n can be evaluated by a infinite recursion of a
short algorithm (see, e.g., Brudno, 1978). As M. Kac wittily mentioned,
almost all numbers from the continuum cannot be defined through a
finite number of words (see the paper of Ford (1983) devoted to these
problems). Moreover, some mathematicians (see Rashevsky, 1976) pose
the problem of whether or not the notion of a very large integer number is
consistent. The point is that, when counting is understood as the result of
sorting of similar obejcts, then sooner or later there arises the problem of
a more exact definition of the given class of objects (see the remarkable
paper of Essenin-Volpin (1966)). For instance, when the reader counts
the cars passing by, he will eventually have the problem of whether or not
a three-wheel vehicle should also be counted.
Thus, randomness is inevitable in the initial conditions. The exponen­
tial instability, typical of mechanical and other systems, makes the role of
chance essential after a sufficient time. We should reject hopes of
deterministic prediction for such long periods. It does not imply,
however, that we are left to the mercy of blind fate. Even in casual
situations, there are elements of predictability which admit important, if
not complete, knowledge. One such element is intermittency, i.e.,
structures in random media. One can predict the characteristic size,
lifetime, amplitude and some other properties of these structures. To
some extent, they behave as regular objects. Note, however, that their
exact positions and moments of appearance cannot be known in advance.
Of course, the intrinsic determinacy of a random process has deep roots
in the central limit theorem.
The inevitability of randomness and combinations of random and
deterministic properties are thus a very general aspect of the physical
universe. In ancient Rome, the prediction and promotion of such events
which were believed to be occasional were called "divinatio" (see
Cicero's treatise 1964, Derf/uinatione).In appreciation of the deepness of
the insight of the ancient philosophers, the dynamics that takes inevitable
randomness into account can be called ^/uinamics.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

REFERENCES

V. S. Afraimovich, V. V. Bykov and L. P. Shilnikov, "On the origin and structure
of the Lorenz attractor", Dok. Akad. Nauk. (SSSR) 234 (1977) 336-339.
M. E. Agishtein and A. A. Migdal, "Computer simulation of three-dimensional
vortex dynamics", Preprint Space Research Institute No. 1102 (1986).
A. P. Aldushin, Ya. B. Zeldovich and B. A. Malomed, "On phenomenological
theory of spin combustion", Combust, and Flame 42 (1981) 1-6.
H. Alfven, "Discussion of the origin of the terrestrial and solar magnetic field",
Tellus 2 (1950) 74-79.
A. A. Andronov, "Les cycles limites de Poincare et la theorie des oscillations
auto-entretenues", C. R. Acad.Sci. (Paris) 189 (1929) 559-561.
F. Anselment, Y. Gagne, E. J. Hopfinger and R. A. Antonia, "High-order velocity
structure functions in turbulent shear flows", J. Fluid Mech. 140 (1970) 63-90.
V. I. Arnold, Mathematical Methods of Classical Mechanics, Springer-Verlag
(1980).
V. I. Arnold, "Some comments on anti-dynamo theorems", Vestn. Moscow
Univ., ser. I, mat. mekh. No. 6 (1982) 50-57.
V. I. Arnold, "Singularities, Bifurcations and Catastrophes", Usp. Fiz. Nauk
(SSSR) 141 (1983) 569-590.
V. I. Arnold, Ya. B. Zeldovich, A. A. Ruzmaikin and D. D. Sokoloff, "Magnetic
field in a stationaryflowwith stretching in a Riemannian space", JETPSl (1981)
2052-2058; Sov. Phys. JETP 56 (1981) 1083-1086.
O. V. Artamonova and D. D. Sokoloff, "Asymptotic analysis of the fast growth of
the second moment of magnetic field in mirror-symmetric flow". Vestn. Moscow
Univ., ser. II, fiz. astron. 27 (1986) No. 38-13.
V. M. Babich and V. S. Baldyrev, Asymptotic Methods in Problems ofShort Waves
Diffraction, Nauka, Moscow (1972).
L. Bachelier, "Theorie de la speculation", Ann. Sci. Ecole Norm. Sup. 17 (1900)
21-86.

305

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

306

REFERENCES

J. Yu. Bakelmann, A. L. Werner, B. E. Kantor, An Introduction to Differential
Geometry as a Whole, Nauka, Moscow (1973).
N. B. Baranova and Ya. B. Zeldovich, "Dislocations of wave front surfaces and
amplitude zeros", JETP 80 (1981) 1789-1797.
N. B. Baranova, Ya. B. Zeldovich, A. V. Mamayev, N. P. Pilipetsky and V. V.
Shkunov, "Dislocation density of the wave front with a speckle structure of the
light fields", JETP 83 (1982) 1702-1710.
G. I. Barenblatt, Similarity, Self-Similarity and Intermediate Asymptotics,
Plenum, New York (1980).
G. I. Barenblatt and Ya. B. Zeldovich, "Self-similar solutions as intermediate
asymptotics". Usp. Mat. Nauk 26 No. 2 (1971) 115-129; Russ. Math. Surveys 26
No. 2(1972)45.
G. K. Batchelor, "On the spontaneous magnetic field in a conducting fluid in
turbulent motion", Proc. R. Soc. London A201 (1950) 405-416.
V. A. Belinsky, L. P. Grishchuk, I. M. Khalatnikov and Ya. B. Zeldovich,
"Inflationary stages in cosmological models with scalar fields", JETP 89 (1985)
346-355.
W. A. Berggren and J. A. van Couvering (eds.), Catastrophes and Earth History.
The new Uniformitarianism, Princeton Univ. Press (1984).
M. V. Berry, J. F. Nye, "Dislocations in wave trains", Proc. R. Soc. London A336
(1974) 165-190.
E. Borel, "Sur les probability denombrables et leurs applications arithmetiques". Rend. Cioc. Mat. Palermo 47 (1909) 247-271.
C. Brooks, S. R. Hart and J. Wendt, "Realistic use of two-error regression
treatment as applied to rubidium-strontium data", Rev. Geophys. and Space
Phys. 10(1972)551-577.
R. Brown, "A brief report on microscopic observations, conducted in June, July
and August 1827, of particles in pollen of plants", Philos. Mag. Ann ofPhilos.
(NewSer.)4(1828) 161-178.
A. A. Brudno, "On complexity of trajectories of a dynamic system" Usp. Mat.
Nauk 33 No. 1 (1978) 207-208.
J. Brunning, "Uber Knoten von Eigenfunktionen des Laplace-Beltrami-Operators", Mathem. Z. 158 (1978) 15-21.
L. A. Bunimovich, "On the decrease of correlations in dynamic systems with
chaotic behaviour", JETP 89 (1985) 1463-1482.
L. A. Bunimovich and Ya. G. Sinai, "Statistical properties of Lorenz gas with per­
iodic configurators of scatterers", Commun. Math. Phys. 78 (1981) 479-497.
P. Cartier, "Perturbations singulieres des equations differentielles ordinaires et
analyse non-standard", Seminaire Bourbaki, 1981/82, Soc. Math. France, Paris
(1982)21-44.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

REFERENCES

307

M. T. Cicero, De senectute, De amicite, De divinatione, With English transl. W. A.
Falconer, London, Cambridge (Mass.): Loeb Classical Library, 1964.
R. Courant and D. Hilbert, Methods of Mathematical Physics, Springer-Verlag
(1962).
R. D. Dakgesamansky and V. R. Shutenkov, "Variation of the background
radiation and structure of galactic magnetic field", Pisma Astron. J. (SSSR) 13
(1987) 182-190.
R. G. Deissler, "Turbulent solutions of the equations of fluid motion", Rev. Mod.
Mj-s. 56(1984)223-254.
P. Dittrich, S. A. Molchanov, A. A. Ruzmaikin and D. D. Sokoloff, "The limiting
distribution of magnetic field strength in a random flow", Magnitnaya gidrodinamika No. 3(1988)9-12.
A. Dold and B. Eckmann, (eds.), Stability Problems for Stochastic Models,
Springer-Verlag(1984).
I. M. Dryomin, "Fractals in problems of multiple particle production", Pisma
JETP 45 (1987) 505-507.
A. Dewdney, "A computer microscope zooms in for a loop at the most complex
object in mathematics", Sci. Am. 253 No. 8 (1985) 16-24.
T. Dombre, U. Frisch, J. M. Greene, M. Henon, A. Mehr and A. M. Soward,
"Chaotic steamlines and Lagrangian turbulence: the ABC flows" J. Fluid Mech.
167(1986)353-391.
G. M. Dvorina, A. A. Ruzmaikin and D. D. Sokoloff, "Temperature spots in
turbulent flow with heating," Teplofizika vysokykh temperatur (SSSR), in press
(1989).
J. P. Eckmann and D. Ruelle, "Egrodic theory of chaos and strange attractors",
Rev. Mod. Phys. 57 (1985) 617-656.
A. L. Efors, Physica and Geometry of Disorder, Nauka, Moscow (1982).
A. Einstein, Eine neue Bestimmung der Molekuldimensionen, Buchdruck K. J.
Wyess, Bern (1905).
A. Einstein, "Zur Theorie der Brownschen Bewegung", Ann. Phys. 19 (1906)
371-381.
A. S. Essenin-Volpin, Editor's notes in Russian translation of Foundations of Set
Theory by A. A. Fraenkel and J. Bar-Hillel, Mir Publ., Moscow (1967).
D. Farmer, "Chaotic attractors of an infinite-dimensional dynamical system",
Physica D 4 (1982) 366-393.
W. Feller, An Introduction to Probability Theory and its Applications, vols. 1-2,
John Wiley & Sons (1966).
H. Ferstenberg, "Noncommuting random products", Trans. Am. Math. Soc. 108
(1963)377-428.
R. P. Feynman and A. R. Hibbs, Quantum Mechanics and Path Integrals,

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

308

REFERENCES

McGraw-Hill (1965).
J. Finn and E. Ott, "Chaotic Flows and Fast Magnetic Dynamos", Phys. Rev.
Lett. 60 (1988) 760-763.
J. Ford, "Is the outcome of coin tossing random?", Physics Today, No. 3 (1983)
40-46.
A. A. Fraenkel and V. Bar-Hillel, Foundations of Set Theory, North-Holland,
Amsterdam (1958).
U. Frisch and G. Parisi, "On the singularity structure of fully developed
turbulence" in Turbulence and Predictability in Geophysical Fluid Dynamics and
Climate Dynamics, LXXXVIII Corso, Soc. Italiana di Fisica, Bologna, Italy
(1985)84-88.
A. V. Gaponov-Grehkov and M. I. Rabinovich, "L. I. Mandelshtam and the
modern theory of non-linear oscillations and waves", Usp. Fiz. Nauk (SSSR) 128
(1979) 579-624; Sov. Phys. Usp. 22 (1979) 590-614.
C. W. Gardiner, Handbook of Stochastic Methods for Physics, Chemistry
and Natural Sciences, Springer Series in Synergetics, 13, H. Haken (ed.), SpringerVerlag(1980).
I. M. Gelfand and A. M. Yaglom, "Functional-space integration and its
applications to quantum physics", Usp. Mat. Nauk 11 (1956) 77-114.
I. I. Gikhman and A. V. Skorokhod, Theory of Random Processes, vols. 1-3,
Nauka, Moscow (1971, 1973, 1975).
K. G. Giovanelli, Secrets of the Sun, Cambridge Univ. Press (1984).
E. B. Gledser, F. V. Dolzhansky, and A. M. Obukhov, The System ofHydrodynamic
Type and their Applications, Nauka, Moscow (1981).
E. S. Golubtsova and T. A. Koshelenko, "Against distortions of ancient history",
Voprosy istorii (Problems of history) No. 8 (1982) 70-82.
P. Grassberger and I. Procaccia, "Measuring the strangeness of strange attractors"
Physica D 9 (1983) 189-208.
Gregorii episcopi Turonesis, Historiarum libri decem, ed. H. Buchner, vols. 1-2
Berlin (1956).
M. L. Gromov, "Isometric imbeddings and immersions", Dok. Akad. Nauk
(SSSR) 192 (1970) 1206-1209; Sov. Math. Dokl. 11 (1971) 794.
J. J. Halliwell and S. W. Hawking, "Origin of structure in the Universe", Phys.
Rev. D31(1985) 1777-1791.
G. H. Hardy, "Weierstrass's non-differentiable function", Trans. Am. Math. Soc.
17(1916)301-325.
K. Hasselmann, "Stochastic climate models. 1. Theory", Tellus 28 (1976)
473-485.
F. Hausdorff, "Dimension and ausseres Mass", 79 (1918) 157-179.
M. M. Henon, "Sur la topologie des lignes de courant dans un cas particulier",

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

REFERENCES

309

C. R. Acad. Sci. (Paris) 262 (1966) 312-314.
C. Hermite, Correspondance d'Hermite et de Stieltjes, 2, p. 318, ved. S. Bailland
and H. Bourget, Gauthier-Villars, Paris (1905).
T. Hida, Brownian Motion, Springer-Verlag (1980).
D. Hilbert, "Uber das Unendliche", Math. Annalen 95 (1925) 161-190.
E. Hopf, "Statistical hydromechanics and functional calculus", J. Rat. Mech.
Anal. 1 (1952)87-123.
W. von Humboldt, "Uber den Nationalcharakter der Sprachen", Gesammelte
Schriften, 4, Berlin (1905).
A. K. M. F. Hussain, "Coherent structures and turbulence", J. Fluid Mech. 173
(1986)303-356.
"Information concerning the accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power station
and its consequences prepared for IAEA", Atomnaya Energiya (Atomic Energy,
SSSR)61 (1986)301-320.
K. Ito, "On a stochastic differential equation", Mem. Amer. Math. Soc. 4 (1951)
1-5.
G. R. Ivanitsky, V. I. Krinsky and E. E. Selkov, Mathematical Biophysics of Cells,
Nauka, Moscow (1978).
K. Janicka, Surrealizm, Wydanictwa Artystyczne i Filmowe, Warszawa (1985).
T. W. Jones, "Polarization as a probe of magnetic field and plasma properties of
compact radio sources: simulation of relativistic jets", Ap. J. 332 (1988) 678-695.
M. Kac, Probability and related topics in physical sciences, Interscience
(1957).
B. B. Kadomtsev and O. P. Pogutse, "Electron heat conductivity of the plasma
across a 'braided' magnetic field", in Plasma Physics and Controlled Nuclear
Fusion Research, Proc, VII Intern. Conf, Innsbruck, 1978, IAEA, Vienna (1979)
649-663.
A. P. Kazantsev, "Enhancement of a magnetic field by a conducting fluid", JETP
53(1967) 1806-1813; Sov. Phys. JETP 26 (1968) 1031-1039.
H. Kesten, Percolation theory for Mathematician, Birkhauser (1962).
P. L. Kirillov, "On the influence of thermodynamical properties of a surface on
heat fluxes in turbulent flow", Inzh.fiz. zhurn. (SSSR) No. 3 (1966) 501-512.
I. M. Kirko, F. M. Mitenkov, V. A. Barannikov, A. K. Gailitis, A. S. Karabasov,
G. E. Kirko, A. I. Kiriushin, O. A. Lielausis, A. M. Mukhametshin, V. N.
Ponomaryov, M. T. Telichko and A. P. Sheykman, "Observation of MHD
phenomenon within the volume of liquid metal of the cooling system of the
breeder reactor BN-600 at Beloyarsk Nuclear Energy Plant", Dok. Akad. Nauk
(SSSR) 257 (1981) 861-863.
N. L. KJeeorin, A. A. Ruzmaikin and D. D. Sokoloff, "Correlation properties of
self-exciting fluctuative magnetic fields" in Plasma Astrophysics, ESA SP-251,

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

310

REFERENCES

Paris (1986) 539-544.
A. N. Kolmogoroff, Basic Principles of Probability Theory, Gostekhizdat,
Moscow (1936).
A. N. Kolmogoroff, "Zur Umkehrbarkeit der statistischen Naturgesetze", Math.
Annalen 113 (1937) 766-772.
A. N. Kolmogoroff, Probability Theory and Mathematical Statistics, Nauka,
Moscow (1986).
A. N. Kolmogoroff, I. G. Petrovsky and N. S. Piskunov, "The analysis of
equation of diffusion accompanied by growth of quantity of matter and its
application to certain biological problem", Bull. Moscow State Univ., Sect. A 1
No. 6(1937) 1-26.
R. H. Kraichnan, "Diffusion of passive scalar and magnetic field by helical
turbulence", J. Fluid Mech. 77 (1976) 753-768.
R. H. Kraichnan and S. Nagarajan, "Growth of turbulent magnetic fields", Phys.
Fluids 10 (1967) 859-870.
F. Krause and K. H. Radler, Meanfield Magnetohydrodynamics and Dynamo
Theory, Pergamon Press (1980).
T. Kaluza, "Zum Unitatsproblem der Physik", Sitz. Press Akad. Wiss., S. (1921)
966-980.
L. D. Landau, "On the problem of turbulence", Dok. Akad. Nauk (SSSR) 44
(1944)339-341.
L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Fluid Mechanics, Addison-Wesley, Reading,
Mass. (1959).
L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Statistical Physics, Nauka, Moscow (1964).
L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, The Classical Theory of Fields, Addison-Wesley,
Reading, Mass. (1962).
V. P. Lazutkin, "Estimation of the gap width in spectrum of the Laplace operator
for a flat convex region", Dok. Akad. Nauk 245 (1979) 20-23.
J. Larmor, "How could a rotating body such as the Sun become magnetic?", Rep.
Brit. Assoc. Adv. Sci. (1919) 159-160.
P. Levy, Processes stochastiques et mouvement Brownien, Hnd ed., Paris (1965).
E. H. Lorenz, "Deterministic nonperiodic flow", J. Atomos. Sci. 20 (1963)
130-141.
M. Lucke, "Statistical dynamics of the Lorenz model". J. Stat. Phys. 15 (1976)
455-475.
I. M. Lifshitz, S. A. Gredeskul and L. A. Pastur, Introduction to the Theory of
Disordered Media, Nauka, Moscow (1982).
N. N. Luchinsky, "Energy consumption estimates for a vehicle in an unsteady
motion", Dokl. VASKHNIL (CR. Sov. Akad. Agricult. Sci.) No. 11 (1984) 41-43.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

REFERENCES

311

A. F. Maistrov, Development of the Concept of Probability, Nauka, Moscow
(1980).
M. Maksimov, "Are 'random' numbers random?", Nauka i Zhizn (Science and
Life, USSR) No. 10(1986) 112-113.
B. Malraison, P. Atten, P. Berge, and M. Dubois, "Dimension of strange attractors:
an experimental determination for the chaotic regime of two convective systems",
J. Phys. Lett. 44 (1983) L897.
B. Mandelbrot, "Possible refinement of the lognormal hypothesis concerning the
distribution of energy dissipation in intermittent turbulence", Lect. Not. Phys. 12
(1972)333-351.
B. Mandelbrot, "Fractals and turbulence: attractors and dispersion", Lect. Not.
Math. 615(1977)83-93.
B. Mandelbrot, Fractals: Form, Chance and Dimension, Freeman, San Francisco
(1977).
V. P. Maslov and M. V. Fedorjuk, Semiclassical Approximation in Quantum
Mechanics, D. Reidel, Dordrecht (1981).
T. B. Maslova and A. A. Ruzmaikin, "The growth of magnetic field fluctuations
in turbulent flow", Magnitnaya gidrodinamika, No. 3 (1987) 3-7.
T. B. Maslova, T. S. Shumkina, A. A. Ruzmaikin and D. D. Sokoloff, "Selfexcitation of fluctuative magnetic fields in spatially bound random flow", Dok.
Akad. Nauk (SSSR) 294 (1987) 1373-1376.
H. P. McKean, Stochastic Integrals, Academic Press (1969).
A. J. Mestel, "On the flow in a channel induction surface", J. Fluid Mech. 147
(1984)431-447.
M. Meneguzzi, U. Frisch and A. Pouquet, "Helical and non-helical turbulent
dynamos", Phys. Rev. Lett. 47 (1981) 1060-1064.
N. V. Menshikov, S. A. Molchanov and A. S. Sidorenko, "Percolation theory and
its applications", Itogi Nauki i Tekhniki: Kibernetika i Matematicheskaya
Statistika, VINITI, Moscow 24 (1986) 3-63.
A. S. Mikhailov and I. V. Uporov, "Critical effects in media with multiplication,
decay and diffusion", Usp. Fiz., (SSSR) 144 (1984) 79-112.
P. W. Milonni, M.-L. Shih and J. R. Ackerhalt, Chaos in Laser-Matter
Interaction, World Scientific (1987).
H. K. Moffatt, "The degree of knottedness of tangled vortex lines", J. Fluid Mech.
35(1969) 117-129.
H. K. Moffatt, Magnetic Field Generation in Electrically Conducting Fluids,
Cambridge Univ. Press (1978).
H. K. Moffatt and M. R. E. Proctor, "Topological constraints associated with fast
dynamo action", J. Fluid Mech. 154 (1985) 493-507.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

312

REFERENCES

S. A. Molchanov, L. I. Piterbarg, A. A. Ruzmaikin and D. D. Sokoloff,
"Variability of temperature field of ocean surface", Dok. Akad. Nauk (SSSR) 283
(1985) 1801-1803.
S. A. Molchanov, A. A. Ruzmaikin and D. D. Sokoloff, "Dynamo equations in
random short-correlated velocity field", Magnitnaya gidrodinamika, No. 4
(1983)67-73.
S. A, Molchanov, A. A. Ruzmaikin and D. D. Sokoloff, "A Dynamo theorem",
Geophys. Astrophys. Fluid Dyn. 30 (1984) 242-259.
S. A. Molchanov, A. A. Ruzmaikin and D. D. Sokoloff, "Kinematic dynamo in
random flow", Usp. Fiz. Nauk (SSSR) 145 (1985) 593-628.
S. A. Molchanov, A. A. Ruzmaikin and D. D. Sokoloff, "Short-correlated
random flow as the fast dynamo", Dok. Akad. Nauk (SSSR) 295 (1987) 576-579.
A. S. Monin and A. M. Yaglom, Statistical Fluid Mechanics, 2, MIT Press (1971).
J. Nash, "C'-isometric imbeddings", Ann. Math. 60 (1954) 383-396.
J. Nash, "The imbedding problem for Riemannian manifolds", Ann. Math. 63
(1956)20-63.
V. V. Nemytsky and V. V. Stepanov, Qualitative Theory of Differential
Equations, Gostekhizdat, Moscow (1947).
V. P. Nosko, "The local structure of Gaussian random fields in vicinity of high
peaks", Dok. Akad. Nauk (SSSR) 189 (1969) 714-717.
E. A. Novikov, "Intermittency and scaling in structure of turbulent flows", Prikl.
mat. i mekh. 35 (1971) 266-277.
V. G. Novikov, A. A. Ruzmaikin and D. D. SokolofT, "Fast dynamo in reflexively
invariant random velocity field", JETP 85 (1983) 909-918.
A. M. Obukhov, "Structure of temperature field in turbulent flow", IzvestiyaAn
SSSR, ser. geograf. geofiz. 13 (1949) 58-96.
E. N. Parker, Cosmical Magnetic Fields {Their Origin and Activity), Clarendon
Press, Oxford (1979).
Peng Zhen, Beijing, the Capital of China, Red Flag Publ. House, Beijing (1986).
J. Perrin , LesAtomes, Libraire Felix Alcan, Paris (1936).
L. S. Polak and A. S. Mikhailov, Selforganization in Non-equilibrium Physicochemical Systems. Nauka, Moscow (1983).
A. M. Polyakov, "Isomeric states of quantum fields", JETP 68 (1975)
1975-1990.
M. M. Postnikov and A. T. Fomenko, New Methods of Statistical Analysis of
Narrative and Numerical Sources of Ancient History, Moscow (1980).
Yu. P. Pyt'ev and I. A. Shishmaryov, Course in Probability Theory and
Mathematical Statistics for Physicists, Moscow State Univ., Moscow (1983).
P. K. Rashevsky, "On the dogma of natural series", Usp. Mat. Nauk 28 (1973)
243-246.
B. D. Rozovsky, "On problem of kinematic dynamo in random flow". IV Intern.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

REFERENCES

313

Vilnius Conf. of Probability Theory and Math. Statistics, 4, Vilnius (1985)
256-257.
D. Ruelle and F. Takens, "On the nature of turbulence". Commun. Math. Phys.
20(1971) 167-192.
A. A. Ruzmaikin, A. M. Shukurov and D. D. Sokoloff, Magnetic Fields ofGalaxies,
Kluwer, Dordrecht (1988).
A. A. Ruzmaikin A. M. Shukurov and D. D. Sokoloff, Magneticfieldsof galaxies,
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht (1988).
A. A. Ruzmaikin and D. D. Sokoloff, "Helicity, linkage and dynamo action",
Geophys. Astwphys. Fluid Dyn. 16 (1980) 73-82.
S. M. Rytov, Ya. A. Kravtsov and V. I. Tatarsku, Introduction to Statistical Radio
Physics 2, Nauka, Moscow (1978).
A. D. Sakharov, "Violation of CP invariance, C-asymmetry and baryon asymmetry
of the Universe", Pisma JETP 5 (1967) 32-35.
B. Saltzmann, "Finite amplitude free convection as an initial value problem "I",
J. Atmos. Sci. 19 (1962) 329-341.
Yu. Saltzman, "How to seed a two-dimensional field". Nauka i Zhizn (Science
and Life, USSR), No. 10 (1987) 103.
F. W. Schelling, Grundiegung der Positive Philosophic, Torino (1972).
E. Schrodinger, "Uber die Umkehrung der Naturgesetze", Sitzungsberder
Preuss, Akad. der Wiss. (1931) 144-153.
Sextus Empiricus with an English translation by the Rev. R. G. Bury, Litt. D.
4, Cambridge (1949).
5. P. Shandarin and Ya. B. Zeldovich, "Topological mapping properties of
collisionless potential and vortex motion", Phys. Rev. Lett. 52 (1984) 1488-1491.
E. D. Siggia, "Collapse and amplification of a vortex filament", Phys. Fluids 28
(1985)794-805.
J. L. Singe, Relativity: The General Theory, North-Holland, Amsterdam (1960).
B. M. Smirnov, "Fractal clusters", Usp. Fiz. Nauk (SSSR) 149 (1986) 177-219.
M. von Smoluchowski, "Zur kinetischen theorie der Brownschen molecularbewegung in der suspensionen", Ann. der Physik 21 (1906) 756-780.
D. D. Sokoloff and V. F. Shvartsman, "Estimate of the Universe size from
topological arguments", JETP 66 (1974) 412-420; Sov. Phys. JETP 39 (1974)
196-200.
D. D. Sokoloff and M. L. Bujakaite, "On some difficulties in application of the
least-squares method to the rubidium-strontium geochronology", in Evolution of
the Core-Mantle System, Nauka, Moscow (1986) 207-216.
D. D. SokolofTand T. S. Shumkina, "On the structure of statistical moments of a
scalar field in random medium", Vestnik Moscow Univ., Ser. 3, vol. 29 (1988)
23-28.
I. M. Sokolov, "Dimensions and other geometrical critical exponents in

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

314

REFERENCES

percolation theory", Usp. Fiz. Nauk (SSSR) 150 (1986) 221-255.
A. M. Soward, "Fast dynamo in a steady flow", /. Fluid Mech. 180 (1987)
267-295.
E. M. Stuerman and M. K. Trofimova, Slavery in the Early Roman Empire in
Italy, Nauka, Moscow (1971).
I. P. Stakhanov, On the.Physical Nature of Ball Lightning, Energoatomizdat,
Moscow (1985).
A. A. Starobinsky, "Dynamics of phase transition in the new inflationary
Universe scenario and generation of perturbation", Phys. Lett. B117 (1982)
175-178.
J. O. Stenflo, "Small-scale solar magnetic fields", in Basic Mechanisms of Solar
Activity, Proc. IAU Symp. No. 17, V. Bumba and J. Kleczek (eds.), D. Reidel,
Dordrecht (1976) 69-99.
R. L. Stratonovich, Conditional Markov Processes, Moscow State Univ. Press,
Moscow (1966).
F. Takens, "Detecting strange attractors in turbulence", in Dynamical Systems
and Turbulence, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 898 (1980) 366-381.
G. I. Taylor, "Diffusion by continuous movements", Proc. Lond. Math. Soc, Ser.
2 20(1921) 196-211.
L. S. Tong, "Heat transfer and nuclear reactor safety", in Proc. Silh. Jut. Heat
Trans. Conf, Toronto 6 (1978).
S. I. Vainstein, "The dynamo of small-scale magnetic field", JETP 79 (1980)
2175-2183; Sov. Phys. JETP 52 (1980) 1099-1107.
S. I. Vainstein and Ya. B. Zeldovich, "Origin of magnetic fields in astrophysics",
Usp. Fiz. Nauk(SSSR) 106 (1972) 431-457; Sov. Phys. Usp. 15 (1972) 159-172.
V. I. Vinogradov, A. M. Leites, M. I. Bujakaite and B. G. Pokrovsky, "Pb-Sr
System in the rocks of Oliokmo-Kalar anorthozite massif and its northern
frame", Dok. Akad. Nauk (SSSR) 273 (1983) 445-449.
G. A. Ville, Biology, W. B. Saunders (1967).
K. Weierstrass, Abhandlungen aus der Funktionleher, Springer, Berlin (1886).
S. B. Wesselowsky, "Gambling as a source of income in Moscovite State of 17th
century", in Selected Papers in Commemoration of W. O. Klutchewsky, Moscow
(1909)291-316.
J. A. Wheeler, Geometrodynamics, Academic Press (1962).
N. Wiener, Nonlinear Problems in Random Theory, The Technology Press of
Massachusetts Inst. of Tech. and John Wiley and Sons (1958).
Ch. Wolf, StOrfall. Nachrichten eines Tages, Aufbau, Berlin-Weimar (1987).
J. Yorke and E. Yorke, "Metastable chaos: the transition to sustained chaotic
behavior in the Lorentz model", J. Stat. Phys. 21 (1979) 263-278.
Ya. B. Zeldovich, "Limiting laws for free upwelling convective flows", JETP 7
(1937) 1463-1465.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

REFERENCES

315

Ya. B. Zeldovich, "The magnetic field in the two-dimensional motion of a
conducting turbulent liquid", JETP31 (1956) 154-156; Sov. Phys. JETP4( 1957)
460-462.
Ya. B. Zeldovich, "Gravitational instability. An approximation theory for large
density perturbations", Astron. Astrophys. 5 (1970) 84-89.
Ya. B. Zeldovich, "Exact solution of the problem of diffusion in a periodic
velocity field and turbulent diffusion", Dok. Akad. Nauk (SSSR) 266 (1982)
821-826.
Ya. B. Zeldovich, "Percolation properties of a two-dimensional steady random
magnetic field", Pisma JETP 38 (1983a) 51-54.
Ya. B. Zeldovich, "On disturbances leading to isolated domains", Dok. Akad.
Nauk (SSSR) 270 (1983b) 1369-1372.
Ya. B. Zeldovich, "Topological and percolation properties of potential mapping
with glueing", Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, Ser. Math. 80 (1983c) 2410-2411.
Ya. B. Zeldovich, G. I. Barenblatt, V. B. Librovich and G. M. Makhviladze,
Mathematical Theory of Combustion and Explosion, Plenum (1985).
Ya. B. Zeldovich P. I. Kolykhalov, "Instability of a tangential discontinuity: the
first approximation in the wave vector", Dok. Akad. Nauk (SSSR) 266 (1982)
302-304.
Ya. B. Zeldovich S. A. Molchanov, A. A. Ruzmaikin and D. D. Sokoloff,
"Intermittency of passive fields in random media", JETP 89 (1985) 2061-2072.
Ya. B. Zeldovich, S. A. Molchanov, A. A. Ruzmaikin and D. D. Sokoloff,
"Intermittency in random media", Usp. Fiz. (SSSR) 152 (1987a) 3-32.
Ya. B. Zeldovich, S. A., Molchanov, A. A. Ruzmaikin and D. D. Sokoloff,
"Intermittency, diffusion and generation in a nonstationary random medium",
Sov. Sci. Rev. C. Math. Phys. 7 (1987b) 1-107.
Ya. B. Zeldovich, S. A. Molchanov, A. A. Ruzmaikin and D. D. Sokoloff, "Selfexcitation of non-linear scalar field in a random medium", Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
USA, ser. Math. 84 (1987) 6323-6325.
Ya. B. Zeldovich and I. D. Novikov, Relativistic Astrophysics, Chicago Univ.
Press (1971).
Ya. B. Zeldovich, A. A. Ruzmaikin and D. D. Sokoloff, Magnetic Fields in
Astrophysics, Gordon and Breach (1983).
Ya. B. Zeldovich, A. A. Ruzmaikin and D. D. Sokoloff, "On representation of a
three-dimensional vectorfieldby scalar potentials", Dok. Akad. Nauk (SSSR) 284
(1985) 103-106.
Ya. B. Zeldovich and S. F. Shandarin, "Voids in the Universe", Pisma Astron. J.
(SSSR) 8 (1982) 131-135.
Ya. B. Zeldovich and D. D. Sokoloff, "On zeros of eigenfunctions of free and
forced oscillations in continual dissipational media", Dok. Akad. Nauk (SSSR)
275(1984)358-361.

The Almighty Chance Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Aaron (MIT) on 11/Jan/13. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

316

REFERENCES

Ya. B. Zeldovich and D. D. SokolofF, "Fractals, similarity, intermediate asymptotics", Usp. Fiz. Nauk (SSSR) 146 (1985) 493-506; Sov. Phys. Usp. 28 (1985)
608-616.
Ya. B. Zeldovich and D. D. Sokoloff, "On eigenoscillations of a region with
random boundary", Dok. Akad. Nauk(SSSR) 280 (1985) 75-77.
Ya. B. Zeldovich, D. D. Sokoloff and A. A. Starobinsky, "Some problems of geo­
metry in the whole relevant to the general relativity", in 150 Years ofLobachevskian
Geometry, VINITI, Moscow (1977) 271-282.
Ya. B. Zeldovich, "Collapse of a small mass in the general relativity", JETP 42
(1962)641-642.
Ya. B. Zeldovich, "Why the Universe expands?" Priroda (Nature USSR) No. 2
(1984)66-71.
Ya. B. Zeldovich, "Can the Universe be formed "from nothing"?" Priroda
(Nature USSR) No. 4 (1988) 16-26.
Ya. B. Zeldovich and A. A. Starobinsky, "A non-trivial topology Universe and
possibility of its quantum birth", Pisma Astron. J. (SSSR) 10 (1984) 323-328.
A. Zygmund, Trigonometrical Series, Cambridge Univ. Press (1959).

