Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
Vol. 84, pp. 6323-6325, September 1987
Applied Mathematical and Physical Sciences

Self-excitation of a nonlinear scalar field in a random medium
YA. B. ZELDOVICHt, S. A. MOLCHANOVt, A. A. RuZMAIKIN§, AND D. D. SOKOLOFFt
tInstitute of Physical Problems, Academy of Sciences, Moscow, U.S.S.R.; tMoscow State University, Moscow, U.S.S.R.; and §Institute of Terrestrial
Magnetizm, Ionosphere and Radiowave Propagation, Academy of Sciences, Moscow Region, U.S.S.R.

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by GEORGIA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY SERIALS CONTROL-EBS on June 11, 2023 from IP address 128.61.96.61.

Contributed by Ya. B. Zeldovich, April 29, 1987

ABSTRACT
We discuss the evolution in time of a scalar
field under the influence of a random potential and diffusion.
The cases of a short-correlation in time and of stationary potentials are considered. In a linear approximation and for sufficiently weak diffusion, the statistical moments of the field
grow exponentially in time at growth rates that progressively
increase with the order of the moment; this indicates the intermittent nature of the field. Nonlinearity halts this growth and
in some cases can destroy the intermittency. However, in many
nonlinear situations the intermittency is preserved: high, persistent peaks of the field exist against the background of a
smooth field distribution. These widely spaced peaks may
make a major contribution to the average characteristics of the
field.

suppression of the growth of high maxima in the solution,
thus smoothing the intermittency. However, the result
proves to be less trivial and depends radically on both the
time behavior of the potential and the form of nonlinearity.
For the sake of simplicity, put X = 0; i.e., neglect the spatial diffusion of the field. We shall indicate the influence of a
weak diffusion on the results separately. We consider two
types of potentials. The first is characterized by a short correlation time
U(t, X, W) = u + r-1/2,
dt

where u is the stationary value of the potential, r is a certain
characteristic time similar to the characteristic turbulent diffusion time in a random flow, w, is the Wiener random process, (wt) = 0, (w') = t, and ( denotes the ensemble average.
The time is conveniently measured in units of r, the dimensionless Wiener process w, is then obtained r-1/2Wt.
The value of u - u obviously has the property of white
noise.
Another type of potential considered here is that of a stationary potential u = u (x, w) that does not include time dependence. All potentials considered are statistically homogeneous in time and statistically homogeneous and isotropic in
space.
(i) Consider first a nonlinearity that is not associated with
the potential

A model of evolution of a scalar field in a prescribed random
medium can be formulated in terms of a parabolic equation
with a random rate of reproduction or extinction, U (the potential, in short):
a =p
= U(t, x, u)~p + WAO
at

p(0, x) = ~p0(x) ¢ 0,

[1]

where a is the diffusion coefficient and co is the random parameter, the potential u is a certain function of t and x for
every value of co. This problem has important applications in
biology and chemical kinetics, where the scalar field is usually understood as a concentration (1). Some problems of
transport of impurities and equations for vector fields (2)
may be reduced, under certain approximations, to equations
of type 1. For example, the transport of an impurity by a
prescribed potential flow is described by the equation

at + div(nv) = wAn,

[2]

at = Up - Ef(c),

[3]

where E is a certain parameter and f(tp) is a given nonlinear
function that grows sufficiently fast with 'p.
The random process described by Eq. 3 with potential 2
can be considered as a one-dimensional diffusion process
along a line, (p being the coordinate along that line

v = V+/i,

which is equivalent to Eq. 1 when the term Vr.V4i can be
neglected in comparison with nV4'-e.g., at the early stages
of evolution of an initially smooth distribution no(x).
In the linear problem (Eq. 1), near those positions where
the potential is positive, there occurs self-excitation (exponential growth) of the field that propagates through diffusion. Random behavior of the potential results in intermittency of the field-i.e., in the appearance of concentrated
structures of (p(t, x) that determine the statistical averages of
the field (3, 4). These structures should not be confused with
structures of the caustic type (see, e.g., ref. 5) or with those
studied by synergetics, whose existence is associated with
nonlinear effects.
Here we show how the processes of self-excitation and
intermittency are affected by nonlinearity, which models the
back-action of the field on the medium. We emphasize that
we consider the simplest nonlinearities, which cannot produce structures alone, without random effects. It is natural
to expect that nonlinear back-action will result primarily in

dtp = (pdw, + (u'p - Ef)dt.

The generating operator of this diffusion process is given by
L = - 2 +(p
(udp
2 d2

Edp

[4]

Thus cp2/2 plays the role of the diffusion coefficient, while
-(usp - ef) represents the convective velocity. Let us denote by p(t, p, p) the fundamental solution (transition density) of the evolutionary problem posed for operator 4, so that
p(O, s, cp) = 8(O - sp) and
ap = L(O)p = L*((p)p,

where the asterisk denotes the adjoint operator.
Suppose that a limiting stationary density distribution ex6323

6324

Applied Mathematical and Physical Sciences: Zeldovich et aL

ists, r(sp)
tion:

lim, p(t, (,'p). It obeys the following equa-

L*ir(p) = 0

[5]

with the natural normalization condition f ,ird'p = 1. The
problem 5 with the operator, adjoint to 4, has solutions. Indeed, the equation
1d 2
2 wf2(vo 2

-

d

ir(usp- ED) = 0

has the first integral

1 d

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by GEORGIA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY SERIALS CONTROL-EBS on June 11, 2023 from IP address 128.61.96.61.

- T(P
2 dp

2

=

P
Proc.
NatL Acad Sci. USA 84 (1987)

where diffusion is neglected and the simplification u = 0 is
adopted. This distribution has two characteristic maxima, at
the origin and at (p. = (oa/2e2)1/4. Thus, we see the evidence
of an island intermittency: one part of the space is occupied
by the field distributed around a high maximum (p. while the
remaining half is empty. When the average value of u is nonvanishing, the relation between the field and empty regions
is different and the problem arises of the percolation structure of this distribution, similar to the problem considered in
ref. 6. A weak diffusion smoothes the 8function-like maximum of distribution 7 but does not affect its intermittent
character.
(ii) Now let us introduce nonlinearity into the potential
term

U(P-2 Ef + C1.

-t g(')u'.

'p

Solutions with cl + 0 are not integrable at 'p = 0 and must be
rejected. As a result, we obtain that when the function f(p)
grows at least as sp2, the limiting distribution ir(qp) is given by

i7r(Op = - exp(21U(K f
where c is the normalization constant.
Consider f = 'p3 as an example. Then

(2e)u1/2
ir((p) = r'(2n
-1)-2(u-) exp(- Eq'2),

[6]

where r is Euler's y function. An important condition of existence of the density ir('p) follows from this as u > 1/2. When
u < 1/2, the density X concentrates at 'p = 0 and the solution
decays. When 1/2 < u < 1, the function wr(p) decreases
monotonically with 'p. In the limit E - 0, which corresponds
to the transition to the linear problem, we obtain ir -O 0. In
this limit and for u > 1, this maximum value of the density
decreases as el/2. It can be shown that r(sp) and all its derivatives vanish at 'p = 0 when the spatial diffusion is taken into
account, ae + 0. In a statistically space-homogeneous medium without spatial diffusion at large times, the solution is
distributed over all positions with equal probability and density ir(ep); the values of 'p at different positions are statistically independent. The spatial diffusion results in the establishment of spatial correlations that decay with distance at the
greater rate the smaller is a.
Statistical moments of the scalar field are

(0q) r(q + 2u -- 1)E-q12
-2q/2r(2u 1)
Note that the distribution 6 for u = 1 coincides with the
"half" of the Gaussian distribution since 'p 0 in our problem.
Although the derived distribution contains maxima of arbitrary height, the probability of high maxima is low and in
general the situation is close to Gaussian statistics; intermittency is absent.
Consider now a random potential that does not depend on
time-e.g., the Gaussian one with the average value u and
the rms deviation a-. At those positions where the potential is
positive the solution for f = (p3 is obviously distributed as
(u/E)1/2. At those positions where u < 0 the solution tends to
zero. For the Gaussian potential the limiting distribution has
the form
-

'T(fp) = -5(0 +
_'p exp
2
VP-

2 p4)

2

[7]

In the simplest case, nonlinearity is described by a step function: g = 1 for 'p < 'pm and g = 0 for 'p '. Let us first
consider the short-correlation potential. For u > '/2, the solution increases exponentially until 'p = 'p,, and remains constant afterward. The case with u < 1/2 is less trivial. In this
case, a typical field realization decays exponentially at the
linear stage but the higher moments increase; i.e., sparse
peaks persist. Those peaks that rise above 'pf are preserved
at this level. As a result, the following stationary picture
arises: at randomly scattered points there are maxima of
height 'pm while the field between them decays exponentially. In the simple example considered, all peaks are as identical as randomly scattered telegraph poles whose positions
are fixed in time. To remove this restriction and obtain some
distribution of maxima in height and its evolution in time, it
is sufficient to consider the function decreasing at infinity.
Consider, for instance, g = (1 + 'p/'pm.)- To simplify the
exposition, put u = 0. Then
,

'p(t, x,c)= {

( poexp(wt - t/2),
(
fmwt,

'p

(PM

(P >-

(PM

It is clear that at those positions where the solution has not
reached the level of 'pm, it decays exponentially in time almost everywhere except at sparse peaks. Meanwhile, at
those positions where the solution has exceeded the level 'pf
at the linear stage, it can still exceed this level for a prolonged period but, sooner or later, it decreases to 'm, again
because of recovery of the one-dimensional Wiener process,
and begins to decay. Of course, oscillations are possible
around the level but the larger the number of such oscillations, the lower their probability. As a result, a typical realization decays in time. However, it contains sparse peaks
against a smooth background and these peaks determine the
values of averaged quantities; i.e., the intermittency is present.

Indeed, the average value ('p) remains constant in time
notwithstanding the fact that a typical realization decays.
This can be seen in the following way. Let the solution reach
and exceed the level 'm at moment tm-i.e., to exceed unity
and, say, become equal to two. Since w, is a random process
with independent increments, we can choose "two" as its
starting point. Then the probability P that the trajectory does
not reach "unity" up to moment t is proportional to (t tm)1"2 since, with overwhelming probability, the random
process concentrates somewhere in a length interval of order
(t - tm)1/2 in this time. Since the typical realization of the
process w, is also of order t1/2, the mean value is (p)
Actually, this fact is true for any deP'pmwtt = constant.
pendence of g('p) because it follows from the fact that the
average value of the Ito stochastic integral fg(')'(w,)dwt
vanishes (7).
-

Applied Mathematical and Physical Sciences: Zeldovich et aL
Other statistical moments increase as (ipq)

-

(t-112)qt1/2

_

t(q-1)2. One can expect that this weak, power-law growth

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by GEORGIA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY SERIALS CONTROL-EBS on June 11, 2023 from IP address 128.61.96.61.

can be stabilized by the weak diffusion ae. The resulting distribution of the peaks over heights is of the Gaussian type.
However, the distribution is far from being Gaussian in general, since between the sparse peaks, whose height is inversely proportional to a power of a, the solution is small,
being determined by diffusion from widely separated peaks.
Meanwhile, in the Gaussian distribution a typical realization
behaves as the average plus or minus the rms deviation. Of
course, for sufficiently large Xe the diffusion smoothes out
the peaks and the intermittency disappears.
For the case of a stationary potential and the step-function
g(p), we again consider regions with positive and negative
values of the potential to obtain a limiting distribution of type
7:
7T((p) = p8(p) + (1 -PW8o - am),

where p is the probability that the potential has a negative
value. For more complicated forms of g(p), the limiting distribution arises only when at least weak diffusion is taken
into account. It also has two maxima that are not 8-functionlike now while the quantity analogous to (p is determined by
the diffusion coefficient a.
Thus, for a stationary potential, the island intermittency
arises independently of the form of the local nonlinear influence.
(iii) The intermittency is still more pronounced when the
nonlinear influence has a nonlocal nature-e.g., when the
nonlinear function in 3 depends on (sp) or (0q) rather than on
sp. Obviously, this leads to stabilization of (up) or (O)q, respectively. All moments with q < q0 and a typical field realization decay exponentially while moments with q > q0 continue their intermittent growth typical of the linear problem
(qo is a certain fixed number).
Thus, the behavior of nonlinear solutions depends radically on the time behavior of the potential and on the form of

Proc. NatL Acad Sd USA 84 (1987)

6325

nonlinearity. In realistic problems, there commonly appears
a condition of conservation of some moment-e.g., of the
average value in the problem of the breeding and death of
bacteria that struggle for food (1) or of the average square
(the energy) in the problem of radiowave propagation in a
random medium (8). In the vectorial problem of the hydromagnetic dynamo, the nonlinear influence of the magnetic
field on the flow is equivalent to the influence on the potential in a scalar problem (9), which makes it reasonable to
expect that the intermittency of a magnetic field would be
preserved in a nonlinear regime. Nonlinearity can be of a
combined nature, combining, say, deterministic nonlinear
damping of the solution with a nonlinear influence on the
potential. In this case, the properties of nonlinear solutions
are determined by a competition of the two nonlinear mechanisms, the first of which tends to suppress the intermittency
(for a short-correlation potential) while the second of which
tends to preserve it. A quantitative detailed analysis of this
competition is a promising field for future studies.
We are grateful to Dr. A. M. Shukurov for discussions and help.
1. Zeldovich, Ya. B. (1983) Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 270, 13691372.
2. Molchanov, S. A., Ruzmaikin, A. A. & Sokoloff, D. D. (1987)
Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 295, 576-579.
3. Molchanov, S. A., Ruzmaikin, A. A. & Sokoloff, D. D. (1984)
Geophys. Astrophys. Fluid Dyn. 30, 241-254.
4. Zeldovich, Ya. B., Molchanov, S. A., Ruzmaikin, A. A. &
Sokoloff, D. D. (1985) J. Exp. Theor. Phys. 89, 2061-2072.
5. Arnold, V. I., Shandarin, S. F. & Zeldovich, Ya. B. (1982)
Geophys. Astrophys. Fluid Dyn. 20, 11-130.
6. Zeldovich, Ya. B. (1983) J. Exp. Theor. Phys. Lett. 38, 51-54.
7. McKean, H. P. (1969) The Stochastic Integral (Academic,
New York).
8. Rytov, S. M., Kravtsov, Yu. A. & Tatarskii, V. I. (1978) Introduction to Statistical Radiophysics (Nauka, Moscow), Vol.
2 (in Russian).
9. Zeldovich, Ya. B., Ruzmaikin, A. A. & Sokoloff, D. D. (1983)
Magnetic Fields in Astrophysics (Gordon and Breach, New
York).

